LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="cy:Pilsen atal cenhedlu cyfunedig">cy:Pilsen atal cenhedlu cyfunedig</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="he:גלולה למניעת היריון">he:גלולה למניעת היריון</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="lt:Piliulės">lt:Piliulės</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="nl:Anticonceptiepil">nl:Anticonceptiepil</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="no:P-pille">no:P-pille</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="nn:P-pille">nn:P-pille</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="ru:Гормональная контрацепция">ru:Гормональная контрацепция</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="sl:Peroralna kontracepcija">sl:Peroralna kontracepcija</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="fi:Ehkäisypilleri">fi:Ehkäisypilleri</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="sv:P-piller">sv:P-piller</a>
LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="th:ยาเม็ดคุมกำเนิด">th:ยาเม็ดคุมกำเนิด</a>



The combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP) is a contraceptive for women. It is often called birth control pill or simply "The Pill." The pills contain hormones that make the women who take them infertile. Women who take the pill will not become pregnant during sexual intercourse. When a woman stops taking the pills, she will usually become fertile again. When taken as prescribed, the pills are one of the safest methods of contraception.
In the 1950s, scientists realized that the hormone progesterone stopped women from making eggs (stopped ovulation).  After this discovery, the combined oral contraceptive pill was created. The combined oral contraceptive pill has two female hormones: estrogen and progesterone. Some oral contraceptive pills have only progesterone. These are often called the "minipill".
The combined oral contraceptive pill is thought to be safe and usually works well.
In the United States, the combined oral contraceptive pill was first given to women in 1960. When a woman uses the Pill in the right way, it works very well to prevent pregnancy. At the same time, it allows the woman and her partner to have sexual intercourse whenever they wish, without reducing the pleasure of sex. For these reasons, the Pill is a very popular method of birth control. Many different pills exist, with different kinds or amounts of hormones.
In 2005, more than  80 million women across the world used the Pill. 
The Pill is the most common method of contraception in the United States. and among women of different ages, levels of education, and marital status.

The choices a woman has for contraception - and whether contraception is even available - depends on what country she lives in. These things are different in different countries. In the United Kingdom, one out of every 4 women aged 16–49 were using the Pill as at 2006 (either the combined pill or progestogen only pill ("minipill")). compared to only 1% of women in Japan. 
Local culture and habits may also affect whether or not people use the Pill. 
In some countries, women do not really have a choice because only one kind of contraception is available.

There are two major kinds of oral contraceptive pills. The first kind has both estrogen and progesterone in it. The other only has progesterone (these are called progesterone-only pills, or POPs). The pills do not actually have natural hormones in them. Instead, they have other chemical substances that are mostly the same as the hormones, but have been made in a laboratory. 
Some women can only take one kind of COCP. For example, estrogen stops the breast from producing milk. Because of this, women who are breastfeeding should not take pills that have estrogen in them. There are also some other types of women who should not be given estrogen. These women should only use progesterone-only pills.
While there are just two major kinds of birth control pills (COCPs and POPs), there are many different brands or versions of each kind of pill. Every brand of COCP will have the same hormones (estrogen and progesterone) in it. However, each brand has a different amount of hormones in it. Also, some brands change the amount of hormones given from week to week.

There are two ways to measure how well COCPs work. (Most forms of birth control are also measured in these two ways.):

To show how well the Pill works, scientists figure out rates of effectiveness (for perfect use and for actual/typical use). These rates show how many women are kept from getting pregnant by the Pill. Rates of effectiveness usually look at how well the Pill works during the first year that women are using the Pill. Most often, the Pearl Index is used to calculate effectiveness rates. However, some studies use decrement tables.
The typical use pregnancy rate for women taking COCPs measures how many women get pregnant while taking COCPs. All women are not equally likely to get pregnant while taking COCPs. Different groups of women have different typical use pregnancy rates. Overall, between 2% and 8% of women taking COCPs get pregnant every year. If COCPs are used perfectly, only 0.3% become pregnant each year.
There are a few reasons why women do not use the Pill perfectly. Because of these things, typical use effectiveness is lower than perfect use effectiveness.

COCPs can prevent pregnancy if the first pill is taken no later than 5 days after a woman starts menstruating. If the treatment is started at any other time in the menstrual cycle, COCPs cannot safely prevent pregnancy for the first 7 days of use. During this time, a woman needs to use other types of contraception in order to prevent pregnancy. When active pills have been taken for 7 days, COCPs can work well to prevent pregnancy. COCPs should be taken at about the same time every day.
Certain things can make COCPs not work as well:


Some other medicines can interact with COCPs and make them not work as well. These medicines can also cause breakthrough bleeding (where a woman bleeds between her periods). Some of these medicines are:

The traditional medicinal herb St. John's Wort also seems to make COCPs not work as well. This is because of the way St. John's Wort affects the liver.

The Pill can be used for other things besides contraception. There are many medical conditions that are caused by problems with hormone levels. Because the Pill has hormones in it, it can treat these conditions. Some of these conditions are:

If a woman's menstrual cycle is not regular, the Pill can make the woman menstruate on a regular schedule. The Pill can also be used to treat certain problems that cause bleeding from the uterus.
Women who use combined oral contraceptives are less likely to get cancer of the ovaries. If a woman takes Pill for five years, her risk for getting ovarian cancer is cut in half. Women taking the Pill are also only half as likely to get endometrial cancer than women who have never taken the Pill. The longer a woman uses the Pill, the more her risk of getting endometrial cancer drops. However, women who take the Pill have a higher risk of getting breast cancer and cervical cancer.





