
Homeopathy is a form of alternative medicine. It was created in the 18th century by Samuel Hahnemann. The basic theory behind Homeopathy is that a sick person can be healed using the rebound effect of a substance that produces the symptoms of  the illness in a healthy person. Some researchers claim that there is scientific evidence that homeopathy helps in many problems and diseases. The solutions in homeopathy are prepared in such a way that, for most of them, it is unlikely that anything from the original substance is still there.  Homeopaths claim that the solution carries a memory of the original substance, but according to science, it is really unlikely that this memory exists or that homeopathy will help people's health. Skeptics claim that people who feel better after homeopathic treatment are likely feeling better because they think they will feel better, a condition known as the "placebo effect."
It is prepared by adding lots of water to a substance, shaking it, then taking a small amount of that water, adding it to more water, shaking that, and repeating that over and over, up to 200 times in some homeopathic remedies. Hahnemann said this would bring out the "spirit-like medicinal powers held within a drug". However, modern science shows how many atoms or molecules - tiny things that cannot be divided up any more - existed in the original substance being diluted. In most homeopathic drugs, scientists can use mathematics to show they are unlikely to have any of the original substance. Even some homeopaths agree with this, but say that quantum mechanics or other things allow homeopathy to work anyway.  Most scientists believe that homeopathy does not work, because its ideas go against those of physics and chemistry.
Homeopathy became popular because it was created at a time when medicine did not work very well and could make people sicker. Back then, taking homeopathy, might have kept people from getting hurt by bad doctors. However, medicine has improved since then, and now helps people  a lot more than it hurts people. So while most people think using homeopathy won't hurt you, if you go to a homeopath instead of a qualified medical doctor, it may keep you from getting help that could save your life. Homeopaths have also been known to tell their patients not to take medicines like antibiotics and vaccines that could cure (or keep them from getting) dangerous diseases.Critical review of The Science of Homeopathy from the British Homoeopathic Journal Volume 67, Number 4, October 1978
Homeopaths view illness as a systemic condition, a disturbance in the overall homeostasis of the total being and accordingly, consider that almost any sick person, may benefit from proper homeopathic treatment. <blockquote>"homeopathy is designed to treat the whole person and can therefore be considered in almost any situation where a person's health is depleted." </blockquote>





