

Manatee Palms Youth Services is a hospital. It has 60 patients at its location in Bradenton, Florida. Manatee Palms Youth Services has been shut down by the State of Florida twice because of hurtful behavior from staff workers and nurses at its hospital. Florida will not let Manatee Palms admit any more patients because of this hurtful behavior. The State of Florida has found Manatee Palms a hospital that doesn't take care of its patients.

The first time abuse at Manatee Palms that is on public record happened in November 1991 when a staff worker sexually hurt a teenage patient. Another situation occurred in February 1994 when Mark Duane Brewer, a hospital counselor, had sex with a 16-year-old patient in the hospital.  Another family filed suit against the same man in May of 1994, alleging their children were also raped. Another situation happened in 1996, when a staff member attacked a patient by putting him in a choke hold and throwing him to the ground. In 1997, an 18 year old man raped a patient at Manatee Palms. 

In October 2004, a sexual assault happened at the facility and the staff member admitted it.
In November 2004, four patients ran away from the hospital, stole a car, caused crashes, and almost hit a sheriff's deputy. In February 2009, a lawsuit was filed on behalf of a former patient who was physically assaulted by staff on a daily basis. 
Manatee Palms was in the news after people found out that a sex offender was employed in 2003. The 41-year-old asked a 15-year-old girl to engage in sexual acts with him and record it with a video camera.

In April 2007, Manatee Palms was closed by the State of Florida for hiring staff members with criminal records, staff abusing patients, buildings falling apart, and threatening some people in Florida. Manatee Palms was fined $12,000 by the state and was forced to make lots of renovations. They reopened in May 2007. In April 2010, Manatee Palms was closed once again due to staff members hurting patients by breaking their bones.






