 Acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis (AECB) are episodes of difficulty in breathing in a person with chronic bronchitis. In concomitant presence of emphysema, the underlying condition can be classified as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and the exacerbations termed "acute exacerbation of COPD", and shares many characteristics with that of AECB. The incidence of AECB varies depending on which definition is used, but by AECB definitions by Anthonisen et al. the typical COPD patient averages two to three AECB episodes per year. With a COPD prevalence of more than 12 million (possibly 24 million including undiagnosed ones) in the United States, there are at least 30 million incidences of AECB annually in the US. During AECB, breathing becomes much more difficult because of further narrowing of the airways, in addition to increased secretion of mucus, which often is thicker than usual. AECB can be caused by: Although the condition of a patient with chronic bronchitis can become exacerbated by many other factors as well, the scope is generally restricted to the ones that cause the symptoms below. An acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis is associated with increased frequency and severity of coughing. It is often accompanied by worsened chest congestion and discomfort. Shortness of breath and wheezing are present in many cases. In infection, there is often weakness, fever and chills. If due to a bacterial infection, the sputum may be slightly streaked with blood and coloured yellow or green. The diagnostic criteria for acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis generally include a production of sputum that is purulent and may be thicker than usual, but without evidence of pneumonia (which involves mainly the alveoli rather than the bronchi). Also, diagnostic criteria may include an increased in frequency and severity of cough, as well as increased shortness of breath. A chest X-ray is usually performed on people with fever and, especially, hemoptysis (blood in the sputum), to rule out pneumonia and get information on the severity of the exacerbation. Hemoptysis may also indicate other, potentially fatal, medical conditions. A history of exposure to potential causes and evaluation of symptoms may help in revealing the cause of an acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, which helps in choosing the best treatment. A sputum culture can specify which strain is causing a bacterial AECB. An early morning sample is preferred. Prevention of AECB include: Treatment is often started before the test results confirm the condition. Treatment of AECB may include: There should also be a "care plan" in case of future exacerbations. Patients may watch for symptoms, such as shortness of breath, change in character or amount of mucus, and start self-treatment as discussed with a health care provider. This allows for treatment right away until a doctor can be seen. 
