 Added sugar(s) refer to sugar carbohydrates (caloric sweeteners) added to food and beverages during its production (industrial processing). This type of sugar is chemically indistinguishable from naturally occurring ones, but the term "added sugar" has become increasingly used in nutrition and medicine, to help identify foods characterized by added energy. Added sugars have no nutritional value, only adding "empty calories". Consumption of added sugar is positively correlated with high calorie intake, and through it, with excess weight and obesity. Added sugars are also known as extrinsic, and naturally occurring ones, as intrinsic. The consumption of added sugars has been positively associated with multiple measures known to increase cardiovascular disease risk amongst adolescents as well as adults. They are also a risk factor for Type 2 Diabetes and high blood pressure, and increase of body weight and obesity. In the USA the most popular types of added sugar are sucrose (table sugar) and high-fructose corn syrup, both primarily composed of about half glucose and half fructose. Other types of added sugar include: all types of beet and cane sugars, all types of corn syrup (including solids), malt syrup, maple syrup, pancake syrup, fructose sweetener, liquid fructose, fruit juice concentrate, honey, molasses, anhydrous dextrose, and crystal dextrose. The most common types of foods containing added sugars are sweetened beverages such as most sodas. In the United States, 20% of daily calorie consumption comes from that single source. World Health Organization recommends that this number should be no higher than 10%. 13% of American population receives over 25% of their calories from added sugars, which often means they are not getting enough of other key nutrients. Data collected in multiple nationwide surveys in the USA from mid-1970s show that the intake of added sugars has increased by over 35%. However, new data collected between 1999 and 2008 show that the intake of added sugars has declined by 23.4 percent with declines occurring in all age, ethnic and income groups. Welsh et al. note that the decrease in added sugar consumption in the USA is related to decrease in the consumption of sweetened beverage, encouraged by the government health awareness initiatives and other programs. 
