 The ADELI Suit was originally designed for the Russian space program in 1971. The purpose then was to give the cosmonauts in space a way to counter the effects of long-term weightlessness on the body. It is currently used to treat children with physical disabilities resulting from cerebral palsy, other neurological conditions originating from brain damage or spinal cord injury. The suit is designed to create a normal framework of forces on the body, stabilizing the torso to allow more fluent and coordinated movement for all the limbs. The suit uses a system of elastic bands and pulleys that create artificial forces against which the body can work, to prevent muscular atrophy and reduce osteoporosis. It consists of a vest, shorts, knee pads, shoes and sometimes a head piece, all connected in a prescribed pattern with bungees of appropriate tension. The theory behind the ADELI Suit is that through active movement therapy the brain is stimulated and thus retrained to recognize, and eventually initiate, correct movement of the muscles. The ADELI Medical Center states that the effect of the suit is that the established pathological synaptic pathways are rewritten with the new normal reflex pathways, which exercises therapeutic effects on the structures of the Central Nervous System responsible for motor activity. Claimed benefits include external stabilization, restoration of muscle tone, re-alignment of the body towards the normal, normalization of gait, provision of tactile stimulation, improved balance, support of weakened muscles, strengthening of functional muscles, relaxation of contracted muscles, and improvement of coordination. Not all patients are suitable for the ADELI Suit treatment. Rehabilitative gains in motor control through treatment with the ADELI Suit are typically retained after the intensive course is completed. Research on groups of children with the ADELI Suit therapy has shown long-term retention of skills once their therapy program ceased. However, further research is still needed into all the long-term effects. 
