 Adenosine monophosphate deaminase deficiency type 1 is also called myoadenylate deaminase deficiency. It a recessive genetic metabolic disorder that affects approximately 1–2% of populations of European descent. It appears to be considerably rarer in Asian populations. The genetic form is caused by a defect in the gene for AMP deaminase though there is also an acquired form of AMP deficiency. AMP deaminase is an enzyme that converts adenosine monophosphate (AMP) to inosine monophosphate (IMP), freeing an ammonia molecule in the process. It is a part of the metabolic process that converts sugar, fat, and protein into cellular energy. In order to use energy, a cell converts one of the above fuels into adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via the mitochondria. Cellular processes, especially muscles, then convert the ATP into adenosine diphosphate (ADP), freeing the energy to do work. During heavy or prolonged mild to moderate activity, other enzymes convert two molecules of ADP into one ATP molecule and one AMP molecule, making more ATP available to supply energy. AMP is normally converted into IMP by myoadenylate deaminase — so myoadenylate deaminase deficiency reduces energy that would be available to the cell through the Purine nucleotide cycle. Normally, excess AMP builds up in the cell and is eventually metabolized in the liver. In persons with a defective enzyme, 5'-nucleotidase removes the ribose and phosphorus from AMP, increasing levels of cellular and circulating adenosine by 16x - 25x. This failure to deaminate the AMP molecules has three major effects. First, significant amounts of AMP are lost from the cell and the body. Second, ammonia is not freed when the cell does work. Third, the level of IMP in the cell is not maintained. The majority of people with the AMPD gene are asymptomatic, but others have symptoms including early fatigue, muscle pain and muscle cramping. ;Fatigue ;Muscle pain ;Muscle cramping ;Muscle weakness It is important for MADD patients to maintain strength and fitness without exercising or working to exhaustion. Learning this balance may be more difficult than normally, as muscle pain and fatigue may be perceived differently than normal individuals. Symptomatic relief from the effects of MADD may sometimes be achieved by administering ribose orally at a dose of approximately 10 grams per 100 pounds (0.2 g/kg) of body weight per day. and exercise modulation as appropriate. Taken hourly, ribose provides a direct but limited source of energy for the cells. Patients with myoadenylate deaminase deficiency do not retain ribose during heavy exercise, so supplementation may be required to rebuild levels of ATP. Creatine monohydrate is also helpful for AMPD patients, as it provides an alternative source of energy for anaerobic muscle tissue. There is also clinical association of various muscular dystrophies with Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS), which needs further clinical study for confirmation. There is an increased risk that statin (cholesterol reducing drugs) will cause myopathy (muscle weakness) in individuals with MADD. Anesthesia has the potential to cause malignant hyperthermia, an uncontrolled increase in body temperature, and permanent muscle damage in patients with MADD. Individuals with MADD are advised to notify their an anesthesiologist about their condition prior to surgery. In most where myopathy is present with MADD, a second muscle disease is present and symptoms are worse than either disease in isolation. 
