 Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) is very similar to both Type 1 diabetes and Type 2 diabetes: although the disease is autoimmune, insulin resistance accompanies the disease as it does Type 2 diabetes. Most latent autoimmune diabetic people are thin, although there are many people that are overweight to slightly obese who have the LADA. The differences between LADA and true type 2 diabetes is, unlike many with the latter, those with LADA become insulin dependent within 3-12 years based on different sources. Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults is very different from true type 1 diabetes in that the condition happens gradually instead of rapid; it's different from type 2 diabetes in that although the latter, like LADA, occurs gradually, with latent autoimmune diabetes of adults, there is also autoimmunity associated. People with LADA are misdiagnosed as having Type 2 diabetes, except that LADA has GAD antibodies. Contrary to the popular belief, some people with latent autoimmune diabetes do have family histories of Type 2 diabetes involving their parents, sister, brother, uncles, aunts, cousins, etc. Also, LADA does not affect children and teenagers and usually affects people age 35 and older, but can affect anyone between 23-30 years of age. People with LADA usually control their diabetes using very similar methods and changes of lifestyle to Type 2 diabetes: eating right, exercising and oral medications; weight loss is optional. Unlike Type 2 diabetics who might never need to inject insulin, however, the LADA patients become insulin dependent within several years. By contrast only 20% to 30% of those with Type 2 diabetes eventually become insulin dependent (i.e., inject insulin). There are glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies connected with the latent autoimmune diabetes. There are also TCF7L2 genes associated with Type 2 diabetes which are also connected with LADA. The complications of latent autoimmune diabetes of adults are highly similar to those for types 1 and 2 diabetes: stroke, heart disease, gangrene, kidney trouble, heart attacks, etc. 
