 An admission note (often called a "history and physical") is part of a medical record that documents the patient's status, reasons why the patient is being admitted for inpatient care to a hospital or other facility, and the initial instructions for that patient's care. Admission notes document the reasons why a patient is being admitted for inpatient care to a hospital or other facility, the patient's baseline status, and the initial instructions for that patient's care. Health care professionals use them to record a patient's baseline status and may write additional on-service notes, progress notes (SOAP notes), preoperative notes, operative notes, postoperative notes, procedure notes, delivery notes, postpartum notes, and discharge notes. These notes constitute a large part of the medical record. Medical students often develop their clinical reasoning skills by writing admission notes. The traditional, rational definition of being admitted usually involves spending an overnight in the hospital. This definition is sometimes stretched in the U.S. medical billing industry, where hospital corporations sometimes blur the definition of "admission" versus "observation" because of reimbursement rules that pay less for the care if an "admission" was involved. An article in the Columbus [Ohio, USA] Dispatch newspaper gives an example.used by healthcare payors to determine billing; An admission note may sometimes be incorrectly referred to as an HPI (history of present illness) or H and P (history and physical), which include only portions of an admission note. An admission note can include the following sections: Not every admission note explicitly discusses every item listed below, however, the ideal admission note would include: Typically one sentence including List of the patient's on-going medical problems. Chronic problems should be addressed as to whether or not they are well controlled or uncontrolled. Include dates of pertinent items. List of surgeries in the past with dates of pertinent items. Health or cause of death for: In medicine, a social history is a portion of the admission note addressing familial, occupational, and recreational aspects of the patient's personal life that have the potential to be clinically significant. Physical examination or clinical examination is the process by which a health care provider investigates the body of a patient for signs of disease. e.g.: electrolytes, arterial blood gases, liver function tests, etc. e.g.: EKG, CXR, CT, MRI Assessment includes a discussion of the differential diagnosis and supporting history and exam findings. 
