 The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) (formerly known as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research) is one of 12 agencies within the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). AHRQ is one of three organizational focuses for HHS along with the National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control. AHRQ's mission is to improve the quality, safety, efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare for Americans. Led by Director Carolyn M. Clancy, M.D., AHRQ sponsors, conducts, and disseminates research to aid in informed decision-making and improve the quality of health care services. Working with the public and private sectors, AHRQ research evaluates the effectiveness of health care interventions and aims to translate this knowledge into everyday practice and policymaking. AHRQ's patient-centered outcomes research aims to improve health care quality by providing patients and physicians with evidence-based information on which medical treatments work best for a given condition. Comparisons of drugs, medical devices, tests, surgeries, or ways to deliver health care can be used to help patients and their families understand and evaluate treatments options and risks. AHRQ initiatives include: AHRQ funds and disseminates research that identifies the root causes of threats to patient safety, provides information on the scope and impact of medical errors, and examines effective ways to make system-level changes to help prevent errors. AHRQ initiatives include: AHRQ's Health IT initiative is part of the Nation's strategy to put technology to work in health care. AHRQ provides support to promote access to and encourage the adoption of health IT. The Agency has focused its health IT activities on the following three goals: AHRQ translates evidence-based knowledge into recommendations for clinical preventive services to improve the health of all Americans. AHRQ initiatives include: AHRQ looks for ways to achieve greater value in health care by producing the measures, data, tools, evidence, and strategies that health care organizations, systems, insurers, purchasers, and policymakers need to improve the value and affordability of health care. AHRQ initiatives include: The agency originally began as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research and was tasked with producing guidelines. However, it became controversial when it produced several guidelines which would reduce lucrative medical drugs and procedures. This included concern from ophthalmologists on a cataract guideline and concern by the pharmaceutical industry over a reduction in the use of new high-margin drugs. When the agency produced a guideline which concluded that back pain surgery was unnecessary and potentially harmful, a lobbying campaign aided by Congressmen whose backs had been operated on changed the name of the agency and "wound down" the guidelines program. 
