 Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences (formerly Albany College of Pharmacy) is a private, independent college whose mission is to graduate the best health care minds in the world. The college has campuses in Albany, New York and Colchester, Vermont. Founded in 1881, Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences (ACPHS) is home to more than 1,700 students and approximately 150 full- and part-time faculty. The College offers an array of degree programs designed for students focused on helping people live healthier lives. In addition to its Doctor of Pharmacy (Pharm.D.) program, ACPHS offers four-year bachelor's degrees in Biomedical Technology, Chemistry, Health and Human Sciences, Microbiology, and Pharmaceutical Sciences. ACPHS has master’s degree programs in Biotechnology, Cytotechnology & Molecular Cytology, Health Outcomes Research, Biotechnology-Cytotechnology, and Pharmaceutical Sciences. Students may also pursue joint degrees in the fields of medicine, law, and business through cooperative agreements with area institutions. Located in the capital of New York State, ACPHS is surrounded by both academic institutions (Albany Law School, Albany Medical College, Sage College) and some of the region's top hospitals (Albany Medical Center, St. Peter's Hospital, Albany Stratton VA Medical Center). The ACPHS Student Center is the hub of the Albany Campus, featuring two lecture halls, the bookstore, the IT Support Center, the "Panther's Den" (student lounge), and the Robison Family Dining Hall. The Dining Hall, newly renovated in 2010, includes offerings from Coldstone Creamery, Tim Hortons, and Au Bon Pain. The Lewis Library is in the midst of a major renovation project first begun in 2010. Once complete, the Library will be greatly expanded in size and scope, offering more study space and services for students. Student housing is provided for all years on campus. The Albany Campus includes three dorms -- South Hall for first year students, Notre Dame for sophomores, and Holland and Princeton Suites for upperclassmen. In addition, University Heights College Suites (UHCS) offers apartment style housing for upperclassmen (UHCS is owned and managed by the Renaissance Corporation, not the College). The College fields intercollegiate sports teams in soccer, basketball, and cross country. The school competes in the Hudson Valley Athletic Conference and is a member of the United States Collegiate Athletic Association. As part of the College's $50 million "Moving Forward" Capital Campaign (launched in 2011), ACPHS is installing a new $2.5 million athletics track and field. The expected completion date for the project is Spring 2013. ACPHS offers a range of undergraduate and graduate programs, which include: ACPHS students go on to pursue a wide variety of careers in the health care field. Some of these careers include: The research taking place across the departments and schools at Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences is helping address several of the world’s most pressing health threats, including a range of work related to the prevention, detection, and treatment of cancer. The College’s Pharmaceutical Research Institute is a center for drug discovery and development, employing a team of experts in fields such as nanotechnology, medicinal chemistry, molecular biology and cell biology. It offers a number of research opportunities and resources for both undergraduate and graduate students of the College. Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences opened a satellite campus in Colchester, Vermont (near Burlington) in fall 2009. There are approximately 270 students enrolled on the campus, all of whom are in the professional Pharm.D. program. NOTE: The college expanded its name from "Albany College of Pharmacy" to "Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences" on October 16, 2008 to better reflect its expanding range of degree programs. 
