 The mycological significance of this dual fermentation process was previously unrecognized. The process of chewing grains or other starches was used in the production of alcoholic beverages in pre-modern cultures around the world; sake in Japan is an example. To date this tradition is still popular among indigenous communities around the world with cassava being the most commonly used plant. Excessive concentrations of some alcohols other than ethanol may cause off-flavors, sometimes described as "spicy", "hot", or "solvent-like". Some beverages, such as rum, whisky (especially Bourbon), incompletely rectified vodka (e.g. Siwucha), and traditional ales and ciders, are expected to have relatively high concentrations of non-hazardous alcohols as part of their flavor profile. However, in other beverages, such as Korn, vodka, and lagers, the presence of other alcohols than ethanol is considered a fault. Alcohols other than ethanol have been used as they are usually not covered by alcohol taxes and alcohol laws. Most alcohols are also significantly more potent than ethanol (e.g. 2M2B requires 20 times lower dose), which provides minimal energy intake. Some tertiary alcohols with historical medical use have been used as ethyl alcohol substitutes as they are not metabolized into toxic aldehydes like acetaldehyde: A Synthetic alcohol substitute is a proposed substitute for alcoholic beverages, and gives the drinker the effects of drunkenness without many of the risks of alcohol. It is currently being developed by a team at Imperial College London, led by Professor David Nutt, chair of the ISCD. It is based on benzodiazepines. Alcohol powder is useful with capsules to eliminate the burning taste of rectified spirit upon ingestion. The powder will produce an alcoholic drink when mixed with water. It will require about 20 x 1 gram capsules to provide 20 cL pure ethanol which may be inconvenient. 2M2B is one of few alcohols potent enough for practical use for alcohol supplementation as it is 20 times more potent. When used in this way combined with time release technology dosage form (e.g. a few small-sized capsules with different time-release), potent alcohols can provide low-dose alcohol therapy to eliminate alcohol intoxication, lower the risk for alcohol dependency, and yet provide eventual health effects. Alcohols without liquid (AWOL) are a set of nebulizers that evaporate alcohol into mist by mixing it with oxygen for inhalation. Also, alcohol powder that is molecularly encapsulated with cyclodextrin can be used with a nebulizer for easier inhalation into the lungs than the ordinarily harsh vapors. Menthol is an alcohol which act as an analgesic, and has GABAAergic activity. It is also a weak kappa opioid receptor agonist. It may be smoked from Menthol cigarettes. Ethanol is usually only injected intravenously as antidote against ethylene glycol or methanol poisoning (see #Antidote). However, diluted distilled beverages are also injected by intravenous drug users, occasionally when they are unable to access other drugs and there is limited alcohol available to get intoxicated orally. One of the tertiary alcohols, ethchlorvynol, is not compatible with intravenous injection and serious injury or death can occur when it is used in this manner Ethanol is safe to use intramuscularly. Teens have been known to use vodka-soaked tampons to get drunk. Pharmaceutical grade ethanol (rectified spirit) diluted 5–10% in 5% dextrose is usually given intravenously as an ethylene glycol or methanol poisoning treatment. However, sometimes ethanol is given orally in the form of distilled beverages such as whisky, vodka, or gin for ethylene glycol or methanol poisoning treatment when no pharmaceutical ethanol solutions are available. In one case, doctors saved a poisoned tourist using a vodka drip. A tincture is typically an alcoholic extract of plant or animal material or solution. To qualify as an alcoholic tincture, the extract should have an ethanol percentage of at least 40-60% or 80-120 proof. Sometimes even a 90% or 180 proof tincture is achieved. Vodka can be used for making elixirs. An elixir (, , xerion "powder for drying wounds", from ξηρός, xeros dry) is a clear, sweet-flavored liquid used for medicinal purposes, to be taken orally and intended to cure one's ills. When used as a pharmaceutical preparation, an elixir contains at least one active ingredient designed to be taken orally. Distilled beverages (spirits) are often used as fuel in fire breathing. 
