 The Alzheimer's Association, incorporated on April 10, 1980 as the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association, Inc., is a non-profit American voluntary health organization which focuses on care, support and research for Alzheimer's disease. The mission of the Alzheimer's Association is: The vision of the Association is "a world without Alzheimer's disease." Approximately 24 million people worldwide are living with Alzheimer's, including 5 million Americans. Jerome H. Stone founded the Alzheimer’s Association with the help of several family support groups after meeting with the National Institute on Aging in 1979. The Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association was incorporated on April 10, 1980. In that year, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) invested $13 million in Alzheimer research. In 1982, President Ronald Reagan designated the first National Alzheimer’s Disease Awareness Week. The Alzheimer's Association founded more chapters and started its own research program. Since its founding, the Alzheimer’s Association, has been a catalyst and leader for a generation of advancements in Alzheimer research and care. The Alzheimer's Association offers a toll-free, 24/7 Helpline for Alzheimer information, referrals and support in multiple languages. It can be reached by calling 800-272-3900. Community-based Alzheimer's Association chapters provide services to families and professionals, including information and referral, support groups, care consultation, education and safety services. MedicAlert + Safe Return 1 is the Association's 24-hour nationwide emergency response service for individuals with Alzheimer’s or related dementia that wander (wandering (dementia)) or who have a medical emergency. The Alzheimer's Association invests in Alzheimer research through a peer-reviewed research grants program. Since 1982, the Association has committed more than $220 million to best-of-field research proposals. The Alzheimer's Association Green-Field Library 2 is the nation's largest library dedicated to Alzheimer's disease. The library provides a wide variety of free information services to the public. Alzheimer’s Association CareSource 3 is an online suite of resources that help coordinate assistance, locate senior housing, receive customized care recommendations and enhance caregiving skills. The Alzheimer's Association Walk to End Alzheimer's (formerly called Memory Walk) is the nation's largest event to raise awareness and funds for Alzheimer care, support and research. Held year-round in all 50 states, this event calls on volunteers of all ages to become champions in the fight against Alzheimer's disease. The Alzheimer's Association Rita Hayworth Galas are held annually in New York City, Chicago and Dallas. Fundraising events, they are named for legendary film star Rita Hayworth, who had Alzheimer’s. The galas are hosted by Ms. Hayworth’s daughter, Princess Yasmin Aga Khan. Started in 1992 by Laurie Burrows Grad in memory of her father writer/ director/ Pulitzer Prize winner, Abe Burrows who died from Alzheimer's disease. An evening of entertainment with many television stars that has raised over 16 million dollars for the Los Angeles Alzheimer's Association. The benefit is chaired by Laurie Grad and her husband, Peter Grad, former executive vice president of 20th Century Fox Television. Blondes vs. Brunettes Powderpuff football games were started by Sara Allen Abbott whose father, Texas State Representative Joseph Hugh Allen, died of Alzheimer's disease in 2008. Looking for a way to raise funds for the Alzheimer’s Association, Abbott organized a powder puff football game in tribute to her father, a lifelong football fan. The game is now played in 16 cities and Abbott has received national recognition for her efforts in raising over $2 million for the Alzheimer’s Association. The game's increasing popularity in the Dallas-Fort Worth area resulted in the 2012 game moving to the Cotton Bowl to accommodate the larger crowds. As a part of the Alzheimer’s Association research focus, the Alzheimer's Association International Conference on Alzheimer's Disease (ICAD) updates knowledge about dementia. Attended by an average 5,000 researchers, physicians and care providers from around the world, ICAD is the largest group of international leaders in Alzheimer research and care. ICAD plenary, symposia, oral and poster session topics include: Genetics, epidemiology and risk factors Cellular and animal models Neuropathology of amyloid, tau, protein misfolding, lipid biochemistry, signal transduction and other disease mechanisms Early detection and diagnosis, neuroimaging and biomarkers Current interventions and future therapies Evidence-based approaches to care and support The Alzheimer's Association Dementia Care Conference provides learning opportunities for care professionals. Alzheimer's & Dementia is the official publication of the Association, published since July 2005 by Elsevier for the dissemination of original research, comprehensive reviews, clinical trial results and other information related to Alzheimer's. This journal presents the latest original, peer-reviewed, basic and clinical research advances in the field, including early detection, prevention and treatment. Alzheimer's Facts & Figures is an annual statistical abstract about Alzheimer's prevalence in the U.S. The Alzheimer's Association has established an action campaign at ActionAlz.org. Through the site, the Association encourages people to become "Champions" for others living with Alzheimer's disease. Champions receive periodic updates on actions they can take to assist in the Association's goal, and update on the Association's progress towards fulfilling its mission. Actions that can be undertaken in the fight against Alzheimer's disease are broken down into categories: Voice, Open, Move and Act. Participants are encouraged to talk about Alzheimer's by telling their story, or simply sharing their thoughts. "Open your eyes" encourages participants to learn about Alzheimer's, and then encourage others to learn. Participants are encouraged to help support the fight against Alzheimer's by volunteering or participating in the Association's Memory Walk. Since 1989, the Alzheimer's Association annual Memory Walk has raised over $225 million to help those with Alzheimer's disease. Participants are encouraged to write to Congress, move the Alzheimer's message, take action in the fight against Alzheimer's. ActionAlz.org lists several people who have chosen to become "Champions" with the Alzheimer's Association. Some of the more notable Champions include: 
