 The American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine (AACOM) is a non-profit organization that supports the United States' colleges of osteopathic medicine and serves as a unifying voice for osteopathic medical education. Governed by its Board of Deans and led by President Stephen C. Shannon, D.O., M.P.H., the association fosters collaboration among its member institutions and is active in advocacy at the federal government level. The organization often works in collaboration with other allied associations and promotes public awareness of osteopathic medical education and osteopathic medicine. It provides centralized services to its members, including data collection and analysis and operation of the online application service (AACOMAS) for prospective students applying to osteopathic medical schools. Stephen C. Shannon, DO, MPH, serves as the President and CEO of the association, directing and assisting AACOM in achieving its goals and objectives. John E. Roane, Jr., serves as the Chief Operating Officer (COO) of the association, managing AACOM’s finance and administrative operations. Other staff leadership includes Thomas Levitan, MEd, Vice President for Research & Application Services, Luke H. Mortensen, PhD, FAHA, Vice President for Medical Education, and Pamela Murphy, MSW, Director of Government Relations. AACOM publishes the Osteopathic Medical College Information Book annually and a free monthly newsletter, Inside OME, on issues related to osteopathic medical education. In addition, the organization maintains an online bookstore with resources for potential applicants, faculy and staff members, medical students, and any other parties interested in osteopathic medical education. In 2009, AACOM published the "Osteopathic GME Match Report," covering data on COMLEX examination scores, credentials, research and volunteer experiences for applicants to residency programs across 21 medical specialties. The report was the first and only report on the osteopathic residency match. In 2011, AACOM published a second "Osteopathic GME Match Report." AACOM has a Council of Osteopathic Student Government Presidents to represent students from the 29 osteopathic medical schools in the United States. The student council was officially established in 1972. 
