 The American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) is a non-profit, independent physician evaluation organization committed to continuously improving the profession for the public good by certifying physicians who practice internal medicine and its sub-specialties. It is not a membership society, educational institution or licensing body but an organization that assess the clinical judgment, skills and attitudes essential for the delivery of quality patient care. More than 200,000 physicians are ABIM Board certified – about one out of every four physicians practicing in the United States. Christine K. Cassel, MD is ABIM's current President and CEO. ABIM, the largest of 24 member certifying boards of the American Board of Medical Specialties was established in 1936 by the American Medical Association and the American College of Physicians to be an independent evaluator of physicians. Since that time, ABIM has worked to ensure a high level of competence in the American health system by certifying physicians who practice internal medicine in one or more of its 19 subspecialties. ABIM Board Certification demonstrates that physicians have met rigorous standards through intensive study, self-assessment and evaluation. Additionally, certification encompasses the six general competencies established by the Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and sets the stage for continual professional development through values centered on lifelong learning. Following regulations established by the ABMS, in order to be certified, a physician must: Physicians may become board certified when they have successfully completed residency or fellowship training and have passed a secure examination. Unlike licensure, board certification is not a requirement to practice medicine. However, board certification is widely accepted as a marker of excellence. Most hospitals require internists to be board certified in order to have admitting privileges, and many health plans require certification for contracting or eligibility for select networks. A growing body of research suggests that physicians who are board certified deliver higher quality of care than their non-certified colleagues and that board certification is correlated with: Research shows that in general, over time, knowledge deteriorates and practice habits and patterns fail to change in response to medical advances. Maintenance of Certification (recertification) promotes lifelong learning and enhancement of the clinical judgment and skills essential for high quality patient care. Every 10 years, some internists and subspecialists certified in or after 1990 renew their certifications through ABIM's Maintenance of Certification program, even though no data exists to suggest the program accomplishes its goals. Fewer than 30 percent of physicians examine their own performance data, and physicians' ability to independently self-assess and self-evaluate is poor. Physicians value a framework that provides them with both guidance and trusted data to conduct self-evaluations so they can see what changes they need to make to improve the quality of care they deliver, and MOC may provides a framework. Additionally, board certification is an important factor when patients choose a physician and a some patients expect their physicians to participate in Maintenance of Certification. There are four elements to ABIM's Maintenance of Certification program: 
