 The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) is a professional organization representing physicians of all oncology subspecialties who care for people with cancer. Founded in 1964 by Drs. Fred Ansfield, Harry Bisel, Herman Freckman, Arnoldus Goudsmit, Robert Talley, William Wilson, and Jane C. Wright, ASCO's more than 30,000 members from the United States and abroad set the standard for patient care worldwide. ASCO members lead the fight for more effective cancer treatments, increased funding for clinical and translational research, and, ultimately, cures for the many different types of cancer that strike an estimated 10 million people worldwide each year. As a non-profit organization, ASCO is dedicated to achieving its charitable mission outlined by the organization's founders in 1964. ASCO strongly supports all types of cancer research, but in particular, patient-oriented clinical research. ASCO is committed to: IMPROVING cancer care and prevention; ADVANCING the education of physicians and other professionals in the care of patients with cancer, and supporting research and the development of clinical cancer researchers; FOSTERING communication among cancer-related medical subspecialties and the exchange of a wide range of ideas related to cancer, including its biology, prevention, diagnosis, staging, treatment, and psychosocial impact; ADVOCATING public policy that ensures patient access to high-quality cancer care and that supports increased clinical cancer research; and ASSISTING oncologists in addressing the challenges of the modern day practice of oncology. ASCO offers several educational resources for cancer physicians and other health care professionals in the field of clinical oncology. These resources include scientific meetings, educational conferences, professional workshops, and special symposia on issues of particular relevance and importance to clinical oncologists and researchers. ASCO publishes numerous journals, books, newsletters, and online and multimedia resources. In addition to producing the patient information website of Cancer.Net, ASCO publishes the Journal of Clinical Oncology (JCO), the most credible, authoritative peer-reviewed resource for disseminating significant clinical cancer research, and the Journal of Oncology Practice (JOP), with the goal of being the authoritative resource on clinical and administrative management for practicing oncologists in their daily clinical and administrative practice operations. ASCO also publishes special curricula to address specific educational needs of cancer professionals. ASCO University is intended to enrich the education and training of residents, fellows, and practicing physicians, with the ultimate goal of promoting high-quality cancer care. With over 30,000 attendees, the ASCO Annual Meeting is one of the largest educational and scientific events in the oncology community. The five-day event provides a venue for physicians and scientists to present research results to a global audience of oncology professionals. Clinical trial results and updates presented at ASCO's Annual Meeting represent the extent of progress made each year in the fight against cancer. Established by the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the Conquer Cancer Foundation (formerly the ASCO Cancer Foundation) is a 501(c)(3) charitable organization that supports clinical research in the field of oncology, patient education, and patient advocacy programs. It funds initiatives spearheaded by the Foundation itself, by ASCO, and by program partners that stand among the most passionate, respected organizations working today in the global campaign against cancer. The Conquer Cancer Foundation's focus extends from cancer prevention through diagnosis, treatment, end-of-life care, and survivorship. Since the inception of its Grants and Awards Program in 1984, the Conquer Cancer Foundation has funded more than 800 researchers worldwide. The Conquer Cancer Foundation Grants and Awards Program provides funding for a multitude of innovative research initiatives, including the Young Investigator Award, the Career Development Award, and the Merit Award. 
