 Relay For Life is a celebration of survival, a tribute to the lives of loved ones and a night of fun, friendship and fundraising to beat cancer. Organized by the Canadian Cancer Society, this event is realized across Canada. Done in team of 10 persons and consist of people representing corporations, communities, families and friends.Also, the Canadian Cancer Society is the largest charitable funder of cancer research in Canada. In 2010-2011, the Canadian Cancer Society funded more than $48 million in leading-edge research projects across the country. Since the first Relay For Life in Canada in 1999, which raised $85,000, the number of Relays and participants has increased each year. In 2011, $55 million was raised. For participate, one team need to be formed and registered online to the official website of Canadian Cancer Society or with a paper form. Each member have to raise a minimum of 100$ in donation or sell a luminaries. Luminaries are special candles that are placed in bags and carry the names of cancer survivors and loved ones lost. In a moving ceremony after sunset, luminaries placed around the track are lit in honour of cancer survivors and in memory of those who have lost the battle against cancer.Most of the time, the average amount raised by single participants at some Relay events across the country is over $300, but year after year the challenge is to meet or beat that average! Funds raising trough Canadian Cancer Society’s mission to eradicate cancer and enhance the quality of life of the person living with the cancer. The donation will help for: → fund the most promising research projects in the country on all types of cancer → provide information services and support programs in the community → advocate for public policies that prevent cancer and help those living with it Thanks to research, more people are surviving cancer with less severe treatment, and found more ways to prevent cancer and to detect it early. Support is important in order to continue to make these advances. Relay is fun, fulfilling, and participation gives strength to Canadian Cancer Society's mission to eradicate cancer. Walk in this inspirational 12-hour overnight event help to fight to make cancer history. Also, it's possible to have an assigned territory to install a tent or a shelter to rest during the night between laps. 
