 Anal fistula, or fistula-in-ano, is an abnormal connection between the epithelialised surface of the anal canal and (usually) the perianal skin. Anal fistulae originate from the anal glands, which are located between the two layers of the anal sphincters and which drain into the anal canal. If the outlet of these glands becomes blocked, an abscess can form which can eventually point to the skin surface. The tract formed by this process is the fistula. Abscesses can recur if the fistula seals over, allowing the accumulation of pus. It then points to the surface again, and the process repeats. Anal fistulas per se do not generally harm, but can be very painful, and can be irritating because of the pus-drain (it is also possible for formed stools to be passed through the fistula); additionally, recurrent abscesses may lead to significant short term morbidity from pain, and create a nidus for systemic spread of infection. Surgery is considered essential in the decompression of acute abscesses; repair of the fistula itself is considered an elective procedure which many patients elect to undertake due to the discomfort and inconvenience associated with a draining tract. Anal fistulae can present with many different symptoms: Diagnosis is by examination, either in an outpatient setting or under anaesthesia (referred to as EUA — Examination Under Anaesthesia). The examination can be an anoscopy. Possible findings: Pilonidal cysts/sinuses are another condition in which infected perianal "holes" or openings may appear There are several stages to treating an anal fistula: Definitive treatment of a fistula aims to stop it recurring. Treatment depends on where the fistula lies, and which parts of the anal sphincter it crosses. There are several options: Some patients will have active infection when they present with a fistula, and this requires clearing up before definitive treatment can be decided. Antibiotics can be used as with other infections, but the best way of healing infection is to prevent the buildup of pus in the fistula, which leads to abscess formation. This can be done with a seton. A traditional ayurvedic medicine treatment for fistulae and piles (inflamed hemorrhoids) consisting of herbs has been in use in India for about 5000 years. This treatment is mentioned in ancient medical texts. 
