 The Anaphylaxis Campaign is the only UK charity to exclusively meet the needs of the growing numbers of people at risk from severe allergic reactions by providing information and support relating to foods and other triggers such as latex, drugs and insect stings. The Campaign aims to create a safe environment for all people living with allergy by educating the food industry, schools, pre-schools, colleges, health professionals and other key audiences. Its focus is on medical facts, food labelling, risk reduction and allergen management. The Campaign provides online training resources for families, carers and health professionals, a helpline, factsheets and other literature, as well as running support groups and workshops. The Campaign was established in 1994 following the deaths of four people from allergic reactions to nuts. Its founder and honorary vice-president, David Reading, was made OBE in the 2005 New Year's Honours List for services to people with allergies. The Campaign's honorary president is William Frankland, the pioneer immunologist, who turned 100 in March 2012. Olympic swimmer Mark Foster has been the Campaign's patron since 2009. His friend and fellow-athlete, Ross Baillie died following an anaphylactic reaction in 1999. The chef Giorgio Locatelli is also a patron of the Anaphylaxis Campaign since 2013. The Anaphylaxis Campaign is a founder member of the National Allergy Strategy Group, a coalition of charities, professional organisations and industry, that seeks to improve health services for allergy sufferers in the UK. The Anaphylaxis Campaign has called for clearer guidelines and greater consistency on food labelling. It has also lobbied to remove what it considers to be unnecessary 'may contain' labelling, arguing that food manufacturers should only use these labels when there is a genuine risk to allergy sufferers. The Anaphylaxis Campaign has tried to raise awareness of the problems caused by inconsistency in how severe allergy is diagnosed. To help improve awareness among frontline medical practitioners, it launched an online training programme, called AllergyWise, in 2011, accredited by the Royal College of Nursing. In March 2011, the Anaphylaxis Campaign held a national conference with the Food Standards Agency, the UK government department, on 'Communicating the science of food allergy'. 
