LINK TO OTHER WIKIPEDIA ---- SHOULD DELETE <a href="fr:Faiseuse d'anges">fr:Faiseuse d'anges</a>
 An unsafe abortion is an abortion which is not done by a person which has the skills to do them (a licensed doctor), or in a place that does not meet at least basic standards of hygiene. Unsafe abortions can be very dangerous to the mother. Many women die or get a disease because they had an unsafe abortion. About 95 percent of unsafe abortions happen in developing countries. Two very common ways that unsafe abortions are done are: A back-alley abortion (Back-Yard Abortion in Australia) is the common slang term for an illegal abortion in the English-speaking world. The method using the coat hanger, as described above, was known by many people. This method was not what was done normally, though. In fact, Mary Calderone, former medical director of Planned Parenthood, said, in a 1960 printing of the American Journal of Public Health: Herbal abortions (when done illegally) can also be described as back-alley abortions because they are not induced in a medical facility. The argument of back-alley abortions was used to help make abortion legal in the United States. In 1973, the US Supreme Court decided that abortion should be legalized. It was treating a case called Roe v. Wade. Since then, it has become a central argument on the part of some prominent legal abortion advocates. Gerri Santoro died of blood loss after a back-alley abortion. Her photo was used extensively to illustrate the dangers of illegal abortions. Bernard Nathanson performed many abortions but later was against them. He has said that many of the statistics that show that many women died from back-alley abortions in the US are false. He said that he and his colleagues made many such statistics to lead people to believe that legalizing abortion was a good thing to do. Source: Unsafe Abortion: Mortality and Risk Estimates of Death data from WHO press, Geneva, 1997 10,000 women a year die from unsafe abortions in Nigeria. category:Abortion 
