 In March and April 2009, an outbreak of a new strain of influenza commonly referred to as swine flu infected many people in Mexico and parts of the United States, causing severe illness in the former. The new strain was identified as a combination of several different strains of Influenzavirus A, subtype H1N1, including separate strains of this subtype circulating in humans (see Human influenza) and in pigs (see Swine influenza). On April 27, Spain confirmed the first case of Swine influenza in Europe. The patient was a 23-year-old man that had returned from Mexico on the 22nd. The case was confirmed in the province of Albacete. On April 28, a second case was confirmed in Valencia. The patient had traveled to Mexico with the first confirmed patient. The Health and Social Policy minister, Trinidad Jiménez, announced that all passengers coming from Mexico, United States, Canada, New Zealand, Colombia, France and Israel have to fill a form during their flight. There has been a reinforcement of medical teams on all airports to handle possible swine flu cases. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs recommended to cancel any travel to Mexico unless strictly necessary. It also recommended to re evaluate the need to travel to the United States. The Spanish government has several million doses of Tamiflu on hand if necessary. Cases of H1N1 swine flu by autonomous community Autonomous Community !! Laboratory confirmed cases !! Other possible cases* !! Deaths from possible cases* Community of Madrid 749 0 Canary Islands 31 0 Balearic Islands 9 0 Andalucia 44 0 Valencian Community 29 15 Catalonia 26 5 Castilla-La Mancha 5 0 Region of Murcia 1 0 Basque Country 1 0 Galicia 1 0 Aragon 1 0 Extremadura 1 0 Castilla y León 7 0 Asturias 1 0 La Rioja 0 0 Navarra 4 0 Ceuta 0 0 Melilla 0 0 Cantabria 1 0 Total 690 +25,000 (*) Not all cases have been confirmed as due to this strain. Possible cases are cases of influenza-like illness (ILI) that have not been confirmed through testing to be due to this strain. A 19-year-old woman in Spain became the first patient in continental Europe who died because of swine flu. A second death was confirmed on 9 July in the Canary Islands, it was a 41-year-old man with a chronic disease.The second affected land in Europe has reported seven death cases up to 29 July. In early June Madrid suffered an outbreak of swine flu among school children. By the 9th of June over 100 school children in Madrid had been confirmed to have swine flu. 
