 Dengue fever is increasingly becoming an epidemic in Pakistan. Due to the high cost of treatment, the disease spread more rapidly in 2011 than in previous years. It has attracted the attention of the Government of Pakistan, especially the Punjab Government since it is widespread in that particular province of the country. As of November 2011, it has killed over 300 people in the last several months and over 14,000 are infected by this mosquito-borne disease. Majority of the people infected are from the Lahore area in Punjab, Pakistan. In November 2010, more than 21,204 people were reportedly infected. Those infected are mainly from Punjab, Pakistan. Patients are primarily admitted to government hospitals. For dengue patients, special wards have been arranged. The severity of the disease is felt in Lahore, the provincial metropolis of Punjab. Early reports showed that more than 170 people have died and several hundreds are admitted as new cases are confirmed. Government of Pakistan and Punjab, Pakistan are working on the preventive measures to reduce the spread of the epidemic. The Government of Punjab has opened a hotline called Punjab Health Line Project For Dengue which can be reached at 0800-99000. This is to facilitate the circulation on the signs and symptoms of dengue, reach for help for suspected cases and ultimately help identify areas where the epidemic may have reached. Spraying teams have been organized for the purpose of fumigating, spraying and fogging areas where the Aedes mosquitoes have known to infect people with the virus. Directions are in place for spraying especially in educational institutes. The government threatened to take action against any private school that did not observe to take these measures. Mobile teams operate around the clock to treat affectees on the spot in rural areas. A Special Tribunal for dengue directly reports to the provincial government. Chairman Dengue Emergency Response Committee Khwaja Saad Rafique has also advised private schools to spray twice a week. In early September 2011, the Government of Punjab ordered the schools, colleges and universities in the Pakistan to close down for 10 days for intensive spraying. Article 144 has been implemented in Lahore for the prevention of dengue. After an appeal by the Punjab, Pakistan, private hospitals have agreed to provide free treatment to dengue patients In this problem the Pakistan Armed Forces is also involved in the fight to control dengue. It is actively engaged in increasing public awareness. It has set up 300 camps in Lahore for relief. The Pakistan Air Force is also actively participating in the efforts. Punjab government stated that it is working to increase public awareness on the dengue outbreak. In an awareness drive, Shahbaz Sharif himself arrived at local universities to hand out pamphlets on dengue fever and prevention. He held a telephonic seminar in Alhmara Hall in Lahore regarding the outbreak. A seminar was also held in Hyderabad by the local authorities. Various other awareness programs are held in colleges and schools and teachers are urged to educate students regarding this matter. The 24 hour government sponsored online service of the Punjab Health Line Project For Dengue provides information on the recent dengue outbreak and how to remove the threat using prevention methods. 
