 Abass Alavi is Professor of Radiology and Neurology. He is the Director of Research Education at the department of Radiology at the University of Pennsylvania.Alavi is the pioneer in modern molecular imaging, having a CV comprising over 660 peer-reviewed publications. Alavi received his medical degree from the University of Tehran. He joined the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in 1971 as a research fellow in nuclear medicine after completing his education in internal medicine, hematology and radiology. He soon thereafter was appointed tothe University of Pennsylvania faculty where he holds appointments as Professor and Director of Research Education, Department of Radiology. Alavi began his work in PET in the 1970’s, and is recognized as an innovator in this field. He has made contributions to the field of modern medical imaging, including the introduction of 18FDG-Positron emission tomography (PET) with his colleagues. He and his colleagues have conducted pioneering research in modern imaging techniques including PET, SPECT, CT and MRI. He is an expert in modern imaging techniques and the clinical applications of PET imaging for the detection of cancer and other disorders including dementia, seizures, cardiovascular disease, and infection. He served as a member and chairman of scientific study sections at the NIH and American Cancer Society. He has published numerous scientific papers, and is the most cited faculty member at U Penn. He is a educator, and his former students and research fellows now occupy positions in Nuclear Medicine worldwide. Positron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear medical imaging technique that produces a three-dimensional image or picture of functional processes in the body. The system detects pairs of gamma rays emitted indirectly by a positron-emitting radionuclide (tracer), which is introduced into the body on a biologically active molecule. One of the factors most responsible for the acceptance of positron imaging was the development of radiopharmaceuticals. In particular, the development of labeled 2-Fludeoxyglucose (18F) (2FDG) by the Brookhaven group under the direction of Al Wolf and Joanna Fowler was a major factor in expanding the scope of PET imaging. The compound was first administered to two normal human volunteers by Alavi in August 1976 at the University of Pennsylvania. He is recipient of many awards and distinctions, among which are the highest distinction in nuclear medicine, the Georg Charles de Hevesy Nuclear Pioneer Award given by the Society of Nuclear Medicine, the Cassen Prize of the Society of Nuclear Medicine, and honorary degrees from the University of Bologna, the University of the Sciences in Philadelphia and the University of Shiraz in Iran. In 2004, Alavi was awarded the Georg Charles von Hevesy Award [4] from the Society of Nuclear Medicine for his pioneering work in the development of positron emission tomography.He is an internationally renowned expert in the modern imaging sciences and in the clinical applications of PET imaging for the detection of cancer as well as neurological, cardiovascular, and infectious disorders. He has been a long-time supporter of educational and research opportunities for students in nuclear medicine. While his name is associated with the Alavi-Mandell Awards, which recognize trainees and young scientists who publish articles as senior authors in the Journal of Nuclear Medicine, his generosity also supports the Pilot Research Grants and the Bradley-Alavi Student Fellowship Awards. Bradley-Alavi Fellows are named in honor of the late Stanley E. Bradley, a professor of medicine at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and a prominent researcher in the fields of renal physiology and liver disease, and Abass Alavi, M.D., professor of radiology and chief of the division of nuclear medicine at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center. funded by the Education and Research Foundation of the Society of Nuclear Medicine. 
