 The acoustic reflex (or stapedius reflex, attenuation reflex, or auditory reflex) is an involuntary muscle contraction that occurs in the middle ear of mammals in response to high-intensity sound stimuli. When presented with a high-intensity sound stimulus, the stapedius and tensor tympani muscles of the ossicles contract. The stapedius stiffens the ossicular chain by pulling the stapes (stirrup) of the middle ear away from the oval window of the cochlea and the tensor tympani muscle stiffens the ossicular chain by loading the eardrum when it pulls the malleus (hammer) in toward the middle ear. The reflex decreases the transmission of vibrational energy to the cochlea, where it is converted into electrical impulses to be processed by the brain. The acoustic reflex normally occurs only at relatively high intensities; activation for quieter sounds can indicate ear dysfunction.The pathway involved in the acoustic reflex is complex and can potentially involve the ossicular chain (malleus, incus and stapes), the cochlea itself (organ of hearing), and from there, the auditory nerve, brain stem and facial nerve. Even this represents a simplification. Consequently, the absence of an acoustic reflex, by itself, may not be conclusive in identifying the source of the problem.<ref name= Probst> The stapedius reflex is also invoked when a person vocalizes. In humans, the vocalization-induced stapedius reflex reduces sound intensities reaching the inner ear by approximately 20 decibels. The stapedius reflex causes an acousto-mechanical increase in impedance. Understanding the basic signal flow through the ear is important. Essentially everything in the ear is connected "in series": The outer ear → the eardrum → the ossicles → the fluid-filled cochlea. Inside the cochlea, a traveling wave of displacement occurs in the fluid, and deflects the inner hair cells' hairs, which causes the primary auditory neurons to send impulses to the brain. If any effect decreases transduction from one element to the next (in the series briefly described above), there will ultimately be less signal sent to the brain. The stapedius reflex that is invoked upon vocalization works in the ossicles of the middle ear, and is an active effect. A muscle is tightened in anticipation of the onset of vocalizing. While the vocalization-induced stapedius reflex in humans results in about a 20 dB reduction in transduction to the inner ear, birds have a stronger stapedius reflex that is invoked just before the bird tweets. Humming when you don't want to hear someone else works through the stapedius reflex. The effect is active; the reflex is not a purely psychological effect or perceptual masking effect or a question of poorer signal-to-noise ratio when "noise" is boosted. Rather, the effect is that less of the sound wave is coupled into the inner ear, making it less loud. The vocalization-induced stapedius reflex can indeed be used for hearing protection purposes. Just before an impulse noise (door slam, electromagnet lock slapback, gunshot, pound of hammer on nail) one could vocalize (or cough or hum) to protect one's hearing from the sound pressure that the impending sound would create. The reflex is not a perceptual reduction in sound; the reflex is a real reduction in sound level reaching the inner earan actual reduction in how far one's delicate hair cells will be bent by that sound. An identical hammer blow when one engaged in no vocalization is more damaging to one's hearing than that same hammer blow if one began vocalizing just a few tens of milliseconds prior to the blow. The stapedius reflex can also be inconvenient in conversations where inadequate time is allowed between one person vocalizing and the next person beginning his/her vocalization. For example, in a telephone conversation in which one's credit card number is read out in sets of four numbers at a time, if the other person starts echoing them back to you in sets of four and you begin vocalizing the next set of four numbers before the other person's stapedius reflex has subsided, it is likely that the other person will mis-hear the first one or two syllables you spoke. Finally, the stapedius reflex is not very effective for very low frequency sounds because they are mainly transmitted by bone-conduction to the ear. For such sounds, intra-aural hearing protection devices (earplugs), or even full-face helmets, can provide attenuation. The stapedius muscle is innervated by the facial nerve, and measurement of the reflex can be used to locate the injury on the nerve. If the injury is distal to the stapedius muscle, the reflex is still functional. 
