 Adolescent medicine is a medical subspecialty that focuses on care of patients who are in the adolescent period of development, generally ranging from the last years of elementary school until graduation from high school (some doctors in this subspecialty treat young adults attending college at area clinics, in the subfield of college health). Patients have generally entered puberty, which typically begins between the ages of 9 to 11 for girls, and 11 to 14 for boys. A primary care subspecialty, adolescent medicine incorporates aspects of gynecology, endocrinology, sports medicine, nutrition, dermatology and psychology. Adolescent medicine is an important specialty of Family Practice, Internal Medicine, Pediatrics and Youth Health. Issues with a high prevalence during adolescence are frequently addressed by providers. These include: Providers of care for adolescents generally take a holistic approach to the patient, and attempt to obtain information pertinent to the patient's well-being in a variety of different domains. This approach, similar to the biopsychosocial model, is encapsulated in the HEADSS assessment, which is a screening acronym for adolescent patients. This has been expanded to HEEADSSS to include additional question sets (indicated with a *). It includes: In addition to a detailed history, adolescents should have a comprehensive physical exam (including a developmental and neurological assessment, STI testing, and a reproductive system exam) and mental health status exam on at least a yearly basis, in addition to yearly dental and ocular exams. Developmental progression, including an assessment of Tanner stage, should be noted at every yearly visit, and appropriate endocrinological work-ups undertaken for patients that fail to develop in an anticipated manner. Young women and young men should be taught how to examine their breast tissue for signs of breast cancer, and young men should be taught how to examine their testicles and penis for cancer and STDs. Screening lab tests, including a complete blood count to screen for anemia, and either a spot cholesterol check or (ideally) a fasting lipid profile to screen for hyperlipidemia, should be obtained at least once during adolescence. For patients who are sexually active, particularly in areas of high prevalence or with patients participating in higher-risk behaviors, screening tests for sexually transmitted diseases should be performed, including an RPR or VDRL for syphilis, screening for gonorrhea and chlamydia, and HIV. Sexually active females should have a pelvic examination and a physical examination if indicated by the presence of symptoms concerning for an STI; males should have a urological examination and a physical examination. Needed immunizations include: a tetanus vaccination or booster shot, a meningitis vaccination, the Gardasil vaccine against HPV (Human Papillomavirus, a leading cause of cervical cancer and genital warts) and a yearly influenza vaccination. In addition, issues of medical ethics, particularly related to confidentiality and the right to consent for medical care, are pertinent to the practice of adolescent medicine. Adolescent medicine providers are generally drawn from the specialties of pediatrics, internal medicine, med/peds or family medicine. The certifying boards for these different specialties have varying requirements for certification, though all require successful completion of a fellowship (a comprehensive list of which is available through the Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine) and a passing score on a certifying exam. The American Board of Pediatrics and the American Board of Internal Medicine require evidence of scholarly achievement by candidates for subspecialty certification, usually in the form of an original research study. In the United States, subspecialty medical board certification in adolescent medicine is available through the specialty boards of American Board of Internal Medicine, the American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and Psychiatry, the American Board of Family Medicine, the American Osteopathic Board of Family Physicians, the American Board of Pediatrics, and the American Osteopathic Board of Pediatrics. Many subspecialists practice as part of general specialty clinics or practices, or in high school or college clinics. In addition, many major metropolitan areas have clinics that offer adolescent-specific care. A partial list includes:Dallas New York City Rochester, NY Los Angeles San Francisco area Boston Philadelphia Columbus Seattle Cincinnati, OH These hospitals offer adolescent-specific care:Sydney Melbourne In addition to membership in the organizations for their various specialties, adolescent medicine providers often belong to The Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine and/or The North American Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology. Founded in 1987, the International Association for Adolescent Health (IAAH) is a multidisciplinary, non-government organization with a broad focus on youth health. 
