 Albert Einstein College of Medicine (Einstein) is a graduate school of Yeshiva University. It is a not-for-profit, private, nonsectarian medical school located on the Jack and Pearl Resnick Campus in the Morris Park neighborhood of the Bronx in New York City. In addition to medical degrees, Einstein offers graduate biomedical degrees through the Sue Golding Graduate Division. Allen M. Spiegel, M.D., has served as The Marilyn and Stanley M. Katz Dean since June 1, 2006. Einstein’s main focal areas are medical education, basic research, and clinical investigation. During the 2012–2013 academic year, Einstein is home to more than 2,000 full-time faculty members, 742 M.D. students, 245 Ph.D. students attending the Sue Golding Graduate Division and 116 students in the combined M.D./Ph.D. program. In addition, there are 360 postdoctoral research fellows at the Belfer Institute for Advanced Biomedical Studies. The medical school is known for its humanistic approach to its curriculum and training and for the diversity of its student body. The class of 2016 includes 183 students from 25 different U.S. states, 23% were born outside the U.S., and 11% identify themselves as belonging to groups considered underrepresented in medicine. Einstein is also a major biomedical and clinical research facility. Faculty members received $160 million in funding from the National Institutes of Health in 2012, ranking 27th among U.S. medical schools. In addition, the NIH funds major research centers at Einstein in diabetes, cancer, liver disease, and AIDS. The mission of Albert Einstein College of Medicine is to prepare physicians and researchers to excel in the science and the art of medicine and basic, translational and clinical investigation. Its founding mandate is to combine the pursuit of scientific excellence with a social mission to improve human health through engagement in local, national and global communities. Yeshiva University President Dr. Samuel Belkin began planning for a new medical school as early as 1945. Six years later, Dr. Belkin and New York City Mayor Vincent Impellitteri entered into an agreement to begin construction. At the same time, world-renowned physicist and humanitarian Albert Einstein sent a letter to Dr. Belkin. He remarked that such an endeavor would be “unique” in that the school would “welcome students of all creeds and races.” Two years later, on his 74th birthday, March 14, 1953, Albert Einstein agreed to attach his name to the medical school. The first classes began September 12, 1955, and had a total of 56 students. At the time, it was the first new medical school to be erected within New York City since 1897. The Sue Golding Graduate Division was established in 1957 to offer Ph.D.s in biomedical disciplines. The Medical Scientist Training Program (MSTP), a combined M.D./Ph.D. program, was first offered in 1964. The C.R.T.P. (Clinical Research Training Program), which confers M.S. degrees in clinical research methods, began classes in July 1998. Source: Einstein website. The school offers M.D.[1] and Ph.D. [2] degrees and has a Medical Scientist Training Program [3] that awards a combined M.D./Ph.D. degree. Students pursuing the Ph.D or M.D./Ph.D. degree are offered full tuition remission and a stipend of $31,300. At any given time there are approximately 724 medical students, 248 Ph.D. students, and 117 students pursuing a combined M.D./Ph.D. The College of Medicine also offers M.S. degrees in clinical research methods [4] and in bioethics [5], as well as a Master of Public Health [6] (MPH) program that focuses on community-based participatory research. The school is known for its medical community promoting awareness, and humanism in social, ethical, and medical realms through its hospital affiliations, free ECHO health clinic [7], and Bronx community health fairs. It is currently ranked nationwide by U.S. News & World Report at #38 in research and #51 for primary care. Albert Einstein College of Medicine is affiliated with seven medical centers: Montefiore Medical Center,the University Hospital and academic medical center for Einstein; Jacobi Medical Center, Einstein’s founding hospital and first affiliate, and five other exceptional affiliates including Bronx Lebanon Hospital [8] and St. Barnabas Hospital, Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan, North Shore-LIJ Health System on Long Island and Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn. The broad geographical reach of Einstein’s residency programs is a distinction not shared by all New York medical schools. Through its affiliation network, Einstein runs the largest postgraduate medical training program in the US, offering some 155 residency and fellowship programs to more than 2,200 physicians in training. Einstein's Department of Family and Social Medicine (DFSM) offers the Residency Program in Social Medicine (RPSM, est. 1970), created to address the shortage of primary care clinicians trained to work in underserved communities. [9] Additionally, Einstein runs the Rose Kennedy Center. The Rose Kennedy Center for research and treatment to help persons who have developmental disabilities is considered a premier center in this type of work. Of particular note are the occupational and physical therapy departments considered cutting edge in this area. Einstein has 31 departments working in the fields of academic medicine and basic science. A Ph.D. or an M.D./Ph.D [10] degree can be pursued in biomedical sciences in any of the following departments: Children's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center (CERC) is the main clinical arm of the Rose F. Kennedy University Center for Excellence in Developmental Disabilities (RFK UCEDD), one of 67 UCEDDs in the United States. Composed of 10 interdisciplinary teams (Early Childhood Center, Infant and Toddler Team, Infant Preschool Unit, School Age Unit, Adolescent Unit, Adult Team, Special Care Dentistry Program, Rehab Team, Children's Hearing Program,and Developmental and Family Support Unit), CERC provides care for approximately 8,000 children and adults with developmental and other disabilities each year. Under the direction of Robert W. Marion, M.D., a medical geneticist, CERC's mission is to provide outstanding care to children with disabilities and their families, provide training to the next generation of leaders in the field of neurodevelopmental disabilities, and to perform research into the causes and potential treatments of the conditions that affect our patients. The research arm of CERC is headed by Dr. John J. Foxe. CERC is home to one of 36 LEND (Leadership in Neurodevelopmental Disabilities) programs in the US, offering hands-on training to professionals in developmental and behavioral pediatrics, special care and general dentistry, medical genetics and genetic counseling, psychiatry, psychology, social work, nursing, and other specialties. Each year, more than 1,000 professionals receive long-term, intermediate-term, or short-term training at our centers. In 2007, CERC has also developed a substantial clinical research program, investigating the causes and treatments of such conditions as autism and autism spectrum disorder, sensorineural hearing loss and cerebral palsy. Einstein is located in Morris Park, a residential neighborhood in the northeast Bronx. Within a 15-minute drive of campus are the Wildlife Conservation Park (better known as the Bronx Zoo) and the New York Botanical Garden and its Haupt Conservatory. Also nearby is the fishing community of City Island, which features marinas and a broad selection of seafood restaurants. There are more than 50 student clubs organized around a variety of activities, medical specialties, and a wide range of religious, political, and ethnic affiliations. Offerings include dance and movie clubs, an arts and literary magazine, and the Einstein Community Health Outreach (ECHO), which launched the state’s first student-coordinated free clinic. Manhattan is a 30–45 minute ride by car, express bus, or mass transit from Einstein’s campus. Beginning in 2007 with the construction of the Michael F. Price Center, EE&K; Architects have been working closely with Albert Einstein College of Medicine on a comprehensive master plan of the future long-term development and renovation of The Jack and Pearl Resnick Campus. The College of Medicine has been the center of several allegations of discrimination. In 1994, the College was sued by Heidi Weissmann, a researcher in nuclear medicine and former associate professor of radiology, for sexual discrimination for not promoting her due to gender bias. The College settled the case for $900,000. In 1998, Yeshiva University and the College of Medicine was sued by the American Civil Liberties Union for discrimination of two medical students over their sexual orientation by not allowing their non-student, non-married partners to live with them in student housing. 
