 Alexander Rivkin (born November 9, 1968) is a Yale-trained facial cosmetic surgeon and UCLA faculty member. He's a leading authority on non-surgical cosmetic treatments, and has been featured in shows such as The Doctors and the Today Show for his Non-Surgical Rhinoplasty procedure. He is based in Westwood, California. Rivkin was born in Odessa, Ukraine in 1968. In 1991 graduated with a BA in Philosophy and Russian from Columbia University in New York City. He later graduated from Yale University School of Medicine in 1997. His postgraduate training was Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery at University of California, San Diego and at the University of Texas, Houston. He is a member of the teaching faculties for Allergan, Medicis, Contura, and Bioform. According to Allergan, Rivkin is now among the top 1% of Botox providers in the United States. Rivkin is currently Director and Chief Physician of Westside Aesthetics in Westwood, Los Angeles. Dr. Rivkin is well known for non-surgical alternatives to common cosmetic procedures. He was the first physician in the United States to offer the "Non-Surgical Nose Job", his signature method for non-invasive correction of cosmetic nasal irregularities. Dr. Rivkin also helped develop and popularize procedures such as non-surgical chin enhancement, non-surgical cheek enhancement, non-surgical jowl lift, and non-surgical eye lift. He uses Botox injections to help patients who habitually grind their teeth or have TMJ (temporomandibular joint disorder). Rivkin first thought of the non-surgical rhinoplasty in 2002. He claims he was filling the nasolabial folds of a friend when he realized he could use collagen to raise the skin above a bump on her nose. Doing so made it appear straight. He's since used the procedure on more than 1000 patients. The whole process only takes 15 minutes, and consists of a series of small filler injections into precise locations on the nose. Rivkin has referred to the non-surgical rhinoplasty as a "non-surgical nose job", "injection rhinoplasty" and "The 15 Minute Nose Job." He has been featured as a consultant in numerous TV shows and publications for the procedures he invented, including The Today Show, The Doctors, The Tyra Banks Show, EXTRA, PBS, KNBC-TV, KABC-TV, Univision, Elle, Bazaar, In Touch Weekly, The New York Times, and Pulse. {{Persondata | NAME = Rivkin, Alexander | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = November 9, 1968| PLACE OF BIRTH = Odessa, Ukraine | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
