 Alimuddin Zumla is professor of infectious diseases and international health at University College London Medical School. He specialises in infectious and tropical diseases, clinical immunology, and internal medicine, with a special interest in HIV/AIDS, respiratory infections, and diseases of poverty. He is internationally renowned for his extensive outputs and leadership of infectious/tropical diseases research and capacity development activities. Zumla was born in Northern Rhodesia (now Chipata, Eastern Province, Zambia). His parents Haji Ismail and Hajiani Aman Zumla were of Gujarati Indian origin. He did his early education at the Lotus Primary School and Prince Philip Secondary School (now Kamwala Secondary School) in Lusaka, and his medical training at the University of Zambia's School of Medicine. He turned down a Rhodes Scholarship to remain in Zambia for his first degree because of his firm belief that training in Zambia would give him first-hand experience of important killer infectious diseases. In 1980, he moved to London to pursue an M.Sc. in tropical medicine at the University of London. In 1982, he contracted life-threatening tuberculous meningitis, and was told that he would never walk again, but went on to make a remarkable recovery and return to work a year-and-a-half later to a star studded career despite disabling and painful neurological sequelae resulting from his meningitis. He went on to pursue doctoral studies on leprosy human monoclonal antibodies at the [[London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine]], where his 1987 dissertation (advised by Keith McAdam) merited him the Alan Woodruff Medal. Following his graduation, Zumla spent a year at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine gaining the MSc degree in Clinical Tropical Diseases with a distinction and the Murgratroyd Prize. He subsequently worked at The Royal Northern and Royal Free Hospitals under the mentorship of David Geraint James obtaining his Membership of The Royal College of Physicians of London. After doing a PhD between 1985 and 1987 he worked as infectious diseases registrar and at the Rush Green Regional Hospital for Infectious Diseases in Romford under Dr Ming Yong and Dr Mervyn Medlock. Whilst working at Rush Green Hospital, he received international acclaim for rapidly identifying and notifying the first cases of the 1988 Legionnaires' Diseases outbreak which he traced back to Broadcasting House, BBC, central London(for which he received accolades from Westminster City Council and the Parliamentary Group). He subsequently spent four years in a senior registrar/honorary lecturer position at the Hammersmith Hospital, Royal Postgraduate Medical School in London under Sir Robert Lechler, and then two years at the University of Texas Center for Infectious Diseases working with Herbert DuPont. He then returned to his native Zambia to work on AIDS-related opportunistic infections at the University Teaching Hospital in Lusaka before moving to University College London in 1994. In 2003, there were media reports about a paper of Zumla's in The Lancet discussing a new test developed by a team he led for monitoring CD4 immune cell counts based on dried blood samples. Such counts are used in monitoring AIDS patients taking antiretroviral drug treatments; Zumla's subsequent work has led to development and evaluation of a range of rapid, cheap and more accessible diagnostic tests for TB and respiratory infections for use on patients in developing countries.Professor Alimuddin Zumla was the guest editor of the Lancet TB Series which addressed key issues around TB treatment and diagnosis.The launch was held at the World Health Organisation (WHO) in Geneva on 18 May 2010. http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/1005/10051901, Zumla is the director of the Centre for Infectious Diseases and International Health at University College London Medical School, as well as a consultant in infectious diseases at University College Hospital. His current research interests include tuberculosis (particularly drug clinical trials and prevalence in London), HIV/AIDS, tropical diseases, respiratory infections (and rapid diagnostics thereof), endocarditis, biomarkers, and transrenal DNA. Zumla's work focuses on improving global health, especially for disadvantaged populations, with an emphasis on assisting poorer sections of the world. He established and directs a multi-country collaboration with several African, European and United States institutions on collaborative research and training program on TB and HIV/AIDS. During the past two decades Zumla and his collaborators have set up research and training programs in Africa, focusing attention on development of local infrastructure and capacity development. Several of his doctoral students now occupy academic positions in institutions in Africa. Zumla has established north-south partnerships for TB research. His collaborations now span five countries in Europe and 10 in sub-Saharan Africa, where he leads several multi-country research projects. His team's research findings have contributed to the development of WHO's management guidelines on treatment and prevention of TB and TB/HIV, and to improvements in the care of patients worldwide. Since his appointment at UCL in 1994, Zumla has received the Weber Parkes Trust Medal and Prize from the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1999; the Albert Chalmers Medal from the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygienein 2002; the Windrush Award for Academic Achievement in 2003; and the 2005 Professional of the year by the "Muslim News" The Muslim News2005 Awards for Excellence. In 2011 and 2012, Zumla received four more major international prizes for his work combating tuberculosis, TB/HIV/AIDS, and other respiratory infectious diseases. These recent spate of awards in include: the UK India International Foundation Science Award (2011); the University of Amsterdam Spinoza Leerstoel award (2011); and the World Health Organisation (WHO) STOP TB Partnership Kochon Prize and Medal (2011) and the Karolinska Institutet, Sweden 2012 Annual Science Prize (2012). In October 2012, Zumla was awarded the highest Zambian civilian award by Zambian president Michael Sata of Zambia for his outstanding contributions to infectious diseases research in sub-Saharan Africa, development of Zambia's health sector, and training of numerous health personnel. The award, The Grand Commander of the Order of Distinguished Services First Division, was bestowed on Zumla on the 48th anniversary of Zambia's Independence.[[Template:dead link]] He has several honorary and visiting professorships from European and African universities, and memberships of numerous international committees and advisory expert groups. He is guest editor and editorial board member of several major medical journals.[[Template:dead link]] Zumla is Chairman of the International Scientific Advisory Expert Group to the United Kingdom All Party Parliamentary Group on Global Tuberculosis and member of Court of Governors of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Zumla has authored 406 publications and edited/published 19 medical textbooks, three of which are globally acknowledged classics: Manson's Tropical Diseases 21st and 22nd editions, Tuberculosis: A Comprehensive Clinical Reference which involves 156 global TB experts writing 104 chapters on all aspects of paediatric and adult TB, and Granulomatous Disorders co-edited with D. G. James. 
