 Alopecia (, from Classical Greek ἀλώπηξ, alōpēx, meaning "fox") means loss of hair from the head or body. Alopecia can mean baldness, a term generally reserved for pattern alopecia or androgenic alopecia. Compulsive pulling of hair (trichotillomania) can also induce hair loss. Hairstyling routines such as tight ponytails or braids may cause traction alopecia. Both hair relaxer solutions, and hot hair irons can also induce hair loss. In some cases, alopecia is due to underlying medical conditions, such as iron deficiency. Generally, hair loss in patches signifies alopecia areata. Alopecia areata typically presents with sudden hair loss causing patches to appear on the scalp or other areas of the body. If left untreated, or if the disease does not respond to treatment, complete baldness can result in the affected area, which is referred to as alopecia totalis. When the entire body suffers from complete hair loss, it is referred to as alopecia universalis. It is similar to the effects that occur with chemotherapy. Symptoms of alopecia include hair loss, skin lesions, and scarring. In male-pattern hair loss, loss and thinning begin at the temples and the crown and either thins out or falls out. Female-pattern hair loss occurs at the frontal and parietal. The following section details many research aspects. Although the various pathways may (or may not) be clinically relevant, none of the current models trying to explain androgenetic alopecia is able to explain why hair-follicles transplanted from one site (often temporal scalp) to another continue to produce growing hair for many years or even lifelong.Another general limitation in understanding alopecia is the lack of studies comparing how many identical vs. non-identical twins of people with androgenetic alopecia also have hair-loss. Such studies are very powerful as they reveal just how much (or how little) of the hair-loss is really genetically determined. Causes of alopecia include: Hair follicle growth occurs in cycles. Each cycle consists of a long growing phase (anagen), a short transitional phase (catagen) and a short resting phase (telogen). At the end of the resting phase, the hair falls out (exogen) and a new hair starts growing in the follicle beginning the cycle again. Normally, about 40 (0-78 in men) hairs reach the end of their resting phase each day and fall out. When more than 100 hairs fall out per day, clinical hair loss (telogen effluvium) may occur. A disruption of the growing phase causes abnormal loss of anagen hairs (anagen effluvium). Because they are not usually associated with an increased loss rate, male-pattern and female-pattern hair loss do not generally require testing. If hair loss occurs in a young man with no family history, drug use could be the cause. In May 2009, researchers in Japan identified a gene, SOX21, that appears to be responsible for hair loss in humans and a researcher in India found a link between androgenic hormone and hair loss. Androgenic alopecia is a counterproductive outcome of the anabolic effect of androgens. In March 2012, George Cotsarelis discovered a causal link between elevated levels of prostagladin D2 (PDG2) and androgenic alopecia. Abnormally high levels of PDG2 (a nearly three-fold increase) were discovered in tissue samples of balding areas compared to haired areas of the scalp. During the course of the research, a PDG2-binding receptor, GPR44, was also discovered. Compounds aimed at targeting the GPR44 receptor are currently being researched. 
