 Alzheimer’s Society is a United Kingdom care and research charity for people with dementia and their carers. It operates in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, while its sister charities Alzheimer Scotland and The Alzheimer Society of Ireland cover Scotland and the Republic of Ireland respectively. Despite its name, the charity does not exclusively help people with Alzheimer's disease. There are many types of dementia, which is an umbrella term. Dementia types include vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, frontotemporal dementia, Korsakoff's syndrome, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, HIV related cognitive impairment, mild cognitive impairment, and other rarer causes of dementia. It is a membership organisation, which works to improve the quality of life of people affected by dementia in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Many of the 25,000 members have personal experience of dementia, as carers, health professionals or people with dementia themselves. The society relies on voluntary donations from the public through fundraising and other activities. It is a registered Charity No. 296645, registered as a company limited by guarantee and registered in England No. 2115499. Its registered office is at Devon House, 58 St Katharine's Way, London E1W 1LB The Chief Executive of the Alzheimer's Society (as at 2013) is Jeremy Hughes. The organisation was formed in 1979, when two people with extensive experience of caring for relatives with dementia discussed the pressing need to raise awareness of dementia and to improve the quality of care, support and information for people with dementia and their carers. This led to the creation of the Alzheimer's Disease Society. A steering committee was formed, consisting of carers and medical professionals, and the first annual general meeting was held on 13 September 1980. This first AGM was attended by 98 members and supporters. The first Newsletter was published in January 1981. A development officer was employed at around this time, and the first branches were established in Oxford and Bromley in 1980 and 1981 respectively. One of the Society's earliest contributions to research, as described in the Newsletter of January 1981, was a request for brain tissue donations to help support research studies. Through the 1980s and 1990s the society continued to grow, with volunteer committees establishing branches across England, Wales and Northern Ireland. At the AGM in 1999 members of the society agreed the change of name to Alzheimer's Society. By 2003 the Society was a £30 million organisation, with over 230 branches across England, Wales and Northern Ireland. In 2009/10 the Society's income had grown to £58.7 million and it currently (2012) has a network of over 2000 services. The society: The society's vision is "a world without dementia". Their mission is to: By pursuing these four goals together they hope to mobilise thousands of people. With them they hope to "reduce the impact of dementia on lives today and create a world without dementia tomorrow". In January, Animal Aid wrote to the four charities that are the focus of their Victims of Charity campaign – Cancer Research UK, the British Heart Foundation, Parkinson's UK and the Alzheimer’s Society – challenging them to a public debate on the scientific and moral issues relating to their funding of animal experiments "Animal Aid plans to take out a series of newspaper adverts urging the public to stop giving money to Cancer Research UK, the British Heart Foundation, the Alzheimer's Society and Parkinson's UK unless they end their support for animal testing." PETA includes the Alzheimer's Society on its list of charities who test on animals. Information listed on their website is as follows;Some charities continue to test on animals. Even if they are conducting valuable work in other fields, it is usually not possible to specify how your donation will be used. In those circumstances, it is best to donate to a charity that doesn't use animals at all. Before giving money to a health-research charity that isn't approved by PETA, we recommend that you investigate their current policy on animal testing (policies can change, which is why a response from the charity itself is the most certain way to find out). Some charities will have that information on their websites, but you may need to contact others directly. If the charity does test on animals, please let them know that you will be donating your money to one which invests all its resources in effective, humane non-animal research instead. The Alzheimer's Society official comment on animal testing is; Alzheimer's Society recognises the necessity of involving animals in medical research. Without animals most of the medical advances we rely on today would not have been possible. This includes vaccination, drugs, surgical techniques and better understanding of the biology of diseases and medical conditions including Alzheimer's disease and dementia. There are difficult ethical concerns about the use of animals in research. For this reason the restrictions placed on the use of animals are extremely strict. Alternative techniques are used wherever possible and all efforts are made to ensure any animals are treated humanely. There are a number of animal 'models' used to mimic the conditions of dementia. The most commonly used models are in mice and fruit flies. Research using these valuable tools has enabled scientists to understand how dementia develops and to test new drugs and treatments. For more information visit the Alzheimer's Society website (www.alzheimers.org.uk) as everything is clearly stated and can be searched easily; 
