 The American Group Psychotherapy Association (AGPA) is a not-for-profit multi-disciplinary organization dedicated to enhancing the practice, theory and research of group psychotherapy. American Group Psychotherapy Association is a national organization with over 2000 members internationally and 31 affiliate societies.Members come from disciplines such as psychology, creative art therapy, psychiatry, nursing, social Work, professional counseloring, addictions, and marriage and family therapy. AGPA's annual meeting attracts approximately 1000 attendees. Meeting sites rotate in order to offer accessibility and exposure to the diverse and rich membership of the association. The inception of the American Group Psychotherapy Association began in 1942 with the actual decision to found the organization being made in February 1943 during a meeting of the American Orthopsychiatric Association in New York City. The organization was first named the American Group Therapy Association. In 1952, the name was officially changed to the American Group Psychotherapy Association. Since its inception AGPA has remained true to its tenets to promote the practice, theory and research of group. The inclusionary nature of this organization continues to attract members from varying disciplines. Samuel R. Slavson was one of the founders and served as the first president of the AGPA. The National Registry of Certified Group Psychotherapists (NRCGP)is a not-for-profit corporation formed to function autonomously from AGPA. The NRCGP awards group therapists certification after they have presented documentation demonstrating the completion of a significant amount of training through coursework, experience, and supervision. A Certified Group Psychotherapist(CGP) is also required to continue lifelong learning by obtaining continuing education credits (CEU's). The diversity of AGPA membership has been actively involved in the promotion of group therapy as an alternative treatment to the public and private sectors. The development of ethical and practice standards. AGPA membership has also responded to the nation's disasters; for example September 11 and Hurricane Katrina. AGPA has also developed a CORE battery for use by practitioners. This battery assists the clinician in the development of an evidence-based practice. Official website Scheidlinger, S., Schamess, G (1992)Fifty Years of AGPA 1942-1992: An Overview. MacKenzie,R. (Ed). Classics in Group Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. Trauma Treatment Initiatives: American Group Psychotherapy Association New York Times Association for Specialists in Group Work (ASGW)a division of ACA 
