 Andrew John Lees (born in 1947 in Merseyside, England) is an English neurologist. He is Professor of Neurology at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London and University College London. In 2011 he was named as the world's most highly cited Parkinson's disease researcher. Lees studied at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel where he was awarded the Jonathan Hutchinson Prize for Clinical Medicine, and trained as a neurologist at the Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, University College Hospital and at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery. He was appointed consultant neurologist to the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square and University College Hospital at the age of 33 years. Lees was director of the Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies at University College London from 1998-2012: under his direction the Institute focused on clinical, pathological and genetic research into neurodegenerative diseases. In 1987 he co-founded the Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders (QSBB), which now houses the largest collection of parkinsonian brains in the world. In 2002 Lees became director of the Sara Koe PSP Research Centre funded by the PSP Association to conduct research into progressive supranuclear palsy. Lees is the past President of the Movement Disorders Society, and Former Co-Editor-in-Chief of the journal Movement Disorders. In 2006 Lees received the AAN Movement Disorders Life Time Achievement Award which recognises outstanding achievement in the field of Parkinson's disease and other movement disorders, He delivered the Gowers Memorial Lecture "In search of the lost mystery of neurology" at the National Hospital in 2006,the 8th Athasit Vejajiva Lecture, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand 2007, the 1st Lord Brain Memorial Lecture at the Royal London Hospital, June 2010, the David Marsden Memorial Lecture at the EFNS Budapest September 2011 and the Stanley Fahn Lecture "The Edgelands of the Shaking Palsy" Movement Disorders Society Congress, Dublin 2012 . He is a Member of Council for the Academy of Medical Sciences and a NIHR Senior investigator. He was awarded Honorary Membership by the Movement Disorder Society in 2010. Lees also sat on the UK Government NCCC Guidleline Development Group for Parkinson's Disease (2006). He is a visiting Professor to both the University of Liverpool and Hospital Sao Rafaele, Salvador Brazil and an honorary overseas member of the Academia Nacional de Medicina, Brazil, one of only four UK clinical scientists to be awarded this honour. http://www.anm.org.br/sessoes_detalhes.asp?id=1026 Lees is recognised as a highly cited neuroscientist on the ISI "Highly Cited Researchers" database with an H-index of 94 and is the world's most highly cited Parkinson's disease researcher with over 23,000 citations since 1985 and co-author of 8 citation classics. {{Persondata | NAME = Lees, Andrew John | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = Neurologist| DATE OF BIRTH = 1947 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
