 Prof Anne MacGregor MD is a medical researcher and clinician based in London, United Kingdom. She is a leading researcher in the field of hormonal effects on migraine. __TOC__ Prof MacGregor received her MB BS from St Bartholomew's Hospital in London in 1986. Although she has undertaken research in all aspects of primary headaches, her postgraduate interest has focussed on the effects of female sex hormones on headache. She is a member of the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare (MFSRH). Her MD Thesis discussed the role of oestrogen in menstrual migraine. Through her work, she delineated clinical definitions for menstrual migraine, accepted by the International Headache Society. She has participated in over 40 industry sponsored clinical trials and over 20 non-industry research trials related to migraine, headache and reproductive health. She is currently honorary Professor at the Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma within the Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry and Associate Specialist in Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare at Barts Health NHS Trust, London as well as working in private practice. Between January 1988 and July 2011 Prof MacGregor worked at the City of London Migraine Clinic, initially training under the neurologists Dr Marcia Wilkinson and Dr Nat Blau. In 1999 she became Director of Clinical Research and joined the Board of Directors as Vice Chairman. She was actively involved with the other headache charities, serving as a trustee of the Migraine Trust and member of the Medical Advisory Board of Migraine Action Association. She has served on the Executive Boards of the British Association for the Study of Headache and the Anglo-Dutch Migraine Association. For almost a decade she was on the Board of Directors of the International Headache Society, serving first as Honorary General Secretary and later as Honorary Treasurer. She was an assistant editor of Cephalagia between 1989 and 1992. In 2002 she received the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Award, which was awarded by the World Headache Alliance to a woman who has “made an extraordinary contribution toward relieving the burden of headaches on those affected”. In addition to her work in headache, Prof MacGregor is active in the field of education and also sexual and reproductive healthcare. She is joint Vice Chair of the Examination Committee and Convener of the critical reading question group for the MFSRH. She is General Training Programme Director for Barts Health NHS Trust. She writes for and lectures to healthcare professionals and lay groups both nationally and internationally. She has published over 180 research papers and book chapters, five single author books, co-authored five books and co-edited three books. She was an expert advisor for the NICE headache guidelines and is a co-author of British Association for the Study of Headache (BASH) Headache Management Guidelines, now in their 3rd edition. 
