 The Anwer Khan Modern Medical College is a Private medical college in Dhanmondi Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh. The college was established in 2008 by businessman Anwer Hossain Khan present chairman of Shahjalal Islami Bank Ltd. This Medical College Hospital is situated at House # 17, Road # 8, Dhanmondi, Dhaka –1205. The academic building of the college is built on its own land having spacious classrooms, lecture galleries, practical classrooms, departmental museums, a library, etc. It also accommodates a cafeteria and separate common rooms for male and female students. There are separate hostels for boys and girls. The college was approved by the government of Bangladesh. It is affiliated with Dhaka University, and enjoys the recognition of the Bangladesh Medical and Dental Council (BMDC) The main course offered is the Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) for 5 years of study. The College follows the curriculum approved by the Dhaka University and Bangladesh Medical and Dental Council. The courses within are divided into the following subtopics: The College has admitted 04 batches of students since its inception.The hospital is situated just behind the college building with all modern amenities offering emergency, outdoor and indoor services round the clock. Academic Council Members Overhead projector, Multimedia projector and other Audio visual equipment using PC and laptop. Seminars are organized on regular basis to ensure the acquaintances of students with the latest development in medical science. The students will be taught by lectures, clinical demonstrations, tutorials and practical. Ward demonstration, Seminars, Symposiums, workshops, field visit etc. Student’s result will depend on their performance on each item. Regular Assessment of the student is done as per University & Govt. criteria. AKMMC Journal is published twice a year (January & July issue). It accepts original research paper, short communication related to various branches of Medicine, interesting case reports, review articles on topics of interest and letters to the editor. Papers should be solely contributed to the journal. http://www.banglajol.info/index.php/AKMMCJhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Schools_of_medicine_in_Bangladeshhttp://www.emedicalpoint.com/index.php?page=private 
