 The organisation formerly known as Arthritis Research Campaign (ARC) is a British medical research charity dedicated to curing arthritis. ARC, which had been founded originally as the Empire Rheumatism Council in 1936, changed its name to Arthritis Research UK [1] in 2010 as part of a drive to raise the profile of Arthritis research and the organisation itself. It has also reduced the potential for confusion with a plethora of other charitable groups using the 'arc' initials. Arthritis Research UK is a United Kingdom based Charity, campaigning and working in the fight against arthritis. Arthritis Research UK was founded in 1936. Arthritis Research UK funds three research institutes focused on beating arthritis: Arthritis Research UK Pain Centre, The Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology and The Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit (EU). Dr Stewart Adams, discoverer of Ibuprofen, opened Arthritis Research UK Pain Centre. The centre, which is based in Nottingham, aims to understand pain and to come up with more effective ways of dealing with it. The Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology is based at the Imperial College London and sits within the Faculty of Medicine. The Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit (EU) is funded at the University of Manchester and sits within the School of Medicine – Research School of Translational Medicine, Epidemiology Research Group. Research has shown that 10 million people in the UK are affected by arthritis. Arthritis Research UK is working to help them to remain active by funding research, campaigning and providing information for patients, the public and health professionals. Arthritis Research UK’s vision is a future free from arthritis. Arthritis Research UK’s mission statement is to reduce the pain and disability resulting from arthritis by: The Arthritis Research UK research committee considers around 400 applications for funding per year. The medical research provides answers about the causes of arthritis, effective treatment, and ultimately the cure for all arthritis and musculoskeletal conditions. Arthritis Research UK has been awarded for: 
