 An artificial airway is a medical technique or tool applied to maintain an open (patent) airway for a person who otherwise is unable to maintain their own for various reasons. A nasopharyngeal airway, also known as an NPA or a nasal trumpet because of its flared end, a type of airway adjunct, is a tube that is designed to be inserted into the nasal passageway to secure an open airway. When a patient becomes unconscious, the muscles in the jaw commonly relax and can allow the tongue to slide back and obstruct the airway. The purpose of the flared end is to prevent the device from becoming lost inside the patient's head. An oropharyngeal airway (also known as an oral airway, OPA or Guedel pattern airway) is a medical device called an airway adjunct used to maintain a patent (open) airway. It does this by preventing the tongue from covering the epiglottis, which could prevent the person from breathing. When a person becomes unconscious, the muscles in their jaw relax and allow the tongue to obstruct the airway. An endo-tracheal tube is a tube inserted through the mouth or nose down into the trachea and secured to maintain a patent airway for a person. The method of placement of a tracheal tube is intubation and the removal of the tube extubation. Cricothyrotomy — A person requiring emergency airway management, in whom tracheal intubation has been unsuccessful, may require an airway inserted through a surgical opening in the cricothyroid membrane. A cricothyrotomy is reserved for emergency access and can be done percutaneously by a paramedic, physician or respiratory therapist, or surgically by a physician or respiratory therapist. Tracheostomy — When a person requires mechanical ventilation for several months or has difficulty protecting their airway naturally, a tracheostomy may provide the most suitable access to the trachea. A tracheostomy is a surgically created passage into the trachea. Tracheostomy tubes are well tolerated and often do not necessitate any use of sedative drugs. Tracheostomy tubes may be inserted early during treatment in patients with pre-existing severe respiratory disease, or in any patient who is expected to be difficult to wean from mechanical ventilation, i.e., patients who have little muscular reserve. A tracheostomy is typically only placed by a physician. A laryngeal mask airway is an airway placed into the mouth and set over the glottis and inflated. This tube does not enter the trachea. 
