 Aspartylglucosaminuria ( commonly referred to as AGU) is an inherited disease that is characterized by a decline in mental functioning, accompanied by an increase in skin bone and joint issues. This disease is caused by a defect in an enzyme known as aspartylglucosaminidase. This enzyme plays a significant role in our body because it aids in breaking down certain sugars ( for example oligosaccharides) that are attached to specific proteins ( for example: glycoproteins). Aspartylglucosaminuria itself is characterized as a lysosomal disease because it does deal with inadequate activity in an enzymes function. Aspartylglucosaminidase function is to break down glycoproteins. These proteins are most abundant in the tissues of the body and in the surfaces of major organs, such as: the liver, spleen, thyroid and nerves. When glycoproteins are unable to be broken down then it causes aspartylglucosaminidase to back up in the lysosomes along with other substances. This back up causes damage to the tissues and organs that is progressive. At birth, there is no signs that a child will develop symptoms of Aspartylglucosaminuria. Typically, signs and symptoms become apparent between two and four years of age and become progressively worse as the individual gets older. The signs and symptoms an individual may see are as follows-　 (Children are physically uncoordinated, but remain able to play sports and do everyday activities until they reach adulthood) http://www.socialstyrelsen.se/rarediseases/aspartylglucosaminuria] This disease isn’t contagious therefore you cannot not catch aspartylglucosaminuria. It is a genetic condition that must be inherited from both parents. You are born with two copies of the gene AGU. One copy comes from the mother’s egg and the other copy comes from the father’s sperm.In order to develop aspartylglucosaminuria, the individual must inherit changes in both of their AGU genes (autonomic recessive inheritance). If a child has aspartylglucosaminuria, their child received a changed copy of the AGU from both parents. When a person receives one changed form of the gene AGU from one of the parents, the individual is then classified as a carrier. In order to be diagnosed with AGU an individual needs to take a urine test, which will show indication of an increased amount of aspartylglucosamin being secreted. The confirmation of the diagnosis of aspartylglucosaminuria requires the individual to take a blood test. The blood test helps show if the enzyme aspartylglucosaminidase is present or partially absent. A skin simple taken from the individual also will show the amount of aspartylglucosaminidase present. When families have a child that has already been diagnosed with AGU, they have the option to observe the enzymes activity that codes for AGU in future pregnancy to help determine if the next child will also have a positive diagnosis for aspartylglucosaminuria. No treatment is available to cure or slow down the progression of aspartylglucosaminuria. Attempts to replace the missing enzyme by a bone marrow transplant have been conducted in hope that the bone marrow will produce the missing enzyme. The results to the tests thus far have shown to be inconclusive. àSince ear infections and respiratory infections are common for children diagnosed with aspartylglucosaminuria, it is best to have regular check ups for both the ears and the respiratory tract.àExtreme sensitivity to the sun’s rays may develop and the best way to protect an individual diagnosed with aspartylglucosaminuria is to have them wear sunglasses, hats or caps to protect their eyes.àEpilepsy and insomnia can both be treated with medication.àIt will be most beneficial to children who are diagnosed with AGU to have receive an education from a school with special teaching. The process of habilitation for individuals diagnosed with AGU needs to be established in their early stages of life. The team for habilitation should include professionals that are experienced in disabilities and the effects that having a disability can have on everyday life. Habilitation will include assessments, assistance with the choice of aids and information concerning disabilities and counseling. Aspartylglucosaminuria is estimated to affect 1 in 18,500 people in Finland. This condition is less common outside of Finland, but the incidence is unknown.Even though this disease can occur in various races and ethnicities, another study made backed this finding up by stating that 1 in 26,000 people in Finland had the disease and that 1 in 18,000 were carriers of aspartylglucosaminuria. After trisomy 21 and fragile X syndrome, this is the most frequent multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome. Individuals with AGU typically have normal development in infancy. Around the age of 2–4 years, they begin showing signs of developmental delay, but development is still progressing. Initial symptoms may present as clumsiness and/or speech delay. Individuals with AGU also show increased upper respiratory infections. Development continues until about puberty, however, individuals at 13–16 years of age typically show mental and motor development similar to a 5-6 year old. Around puberty, a gradual decline in mental abilities and motor skills occurs. This progressive decline continues until about 25–28 years of age, when rapid impairment of abilities occurs, resulting in severe mental retardation. Aspartylglucosaminuria was first reported by Jenner and Pollitt (1967) Pollitt also aided in finding the urinary excretion amounts of 2-acetamido-1-(beta-L-aspartamido)-1,2-dideoxyglucose in a 32-year-old female and her 20-year-old brother with mental retardation.An enzyme responsible for hydrolyzing this compound is normally present in seminal fluid but was absent in that of the brother. A generalized lack of this enzyme was postulated. Both sibs had thick sagging skin of the cheeks, a finding not present in normal members of the family. Palo and Mattsson (1970) reported 11 cases in Finland. The parents of 1 patient were first cousins. The Finnish cases showed, in addition to severe mental retardation, sagging cheeks, broad nose and face, short neck, cranial asymmetry, scoliosis, periodic hyperactivity, and vacuolated lymphocytes. Diarrhea and frequent infections were problems in infancy. Aspartylglucosaminuria has also been observed in Finns living in Norway (Borud and Torp, 1976). Gehler(1981) described affected brother and sister in a consanguineous Italian sibship; one of the patients showed angiokeratoma corporis diffusum. Yoshida (1991) and Vargas-Diez et al. (2002) also described the occurrence of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum in 2 Japanese patients and 1 Spanish patient, respectively, withaspartylglucosaminuria. Stevenson et al. (1982) reported this disorder in an 18-year-old American. The family name was Scottish-Irish. The mother was said to have been aged 13 years and the father was unknown—circumstances suggesting incest. Mental retardation, recurrent infections, cardiomyopathy, and emotional lability were features. Hreidarsson et al. (1983) reported a case in an American black and an American white of uncertain parentage. Radiographic changes in the handswere noted: thin epiphyses, broad 'poorly modeled' metacarpals, and peculiarly shaped carpal bones. Isenberg and Sharp (1975) reported the case of a girl of Mexican-Italian extraction living in the U.S. Chitayat et al. (1988) described 3 Puerto Rican brothers, with first-cousin parents, who had AGU. Two of the brothers were monozygotic twins. Macroorchidism became evident in all 3 boys at the time of puberty. This feature had not previously been noted in AGU, although other endocrinologic abnormalities had been described. Yoshida et al. (1991) described the first Japanese patients with AGU—a brother and sister, aged 45 and 41, respectively. Both sibs had mental retardation, coarse facial features, angiokeratoma, and myoclonic seizures. Zlotogora et al. (1997) diagnosed this disorder in 8 patients originating from 3 unrelated families, all Palestinian Arabs from the region of Jerusalem. Gordon et al. (1998) described a Canadian family in which 4 of 12 sibs were affected, 2 brothers and 2 sisters. Though apparently normal at birth, their developmental milestones, particularly speech, were slow, and they acquired only a simple vocabulary. There was a progressive coarsening of facial features; 3 had inguinal hernia and recurrent diarrhea; all became severely retarded and by the fourth decade showed evident deterioration of both cognitive and motor skills; and 2 exhibited cyclic behavioral changes. Three of the sibs had died, at 33,39, and 44 years of age. 
