 Assertive community treatment, or ACT, is an intensive and highly integrated approach for community mental health service delivery. ACT programs serve outpatients whose symptoms of mental illness result in serious functioning difficulties in several major areas of life, often including work, social relationships, residential independence, money management, and physical health and wellness. The defining characteristics of ACT include: In the array of standard mental health service types, ACT is considered a "medically monitored non-residential service" (Level 4), making it more intensive than "high intensity community based services" (Level 3) but less intensive than "medically monitored residential services" (Level 5) on the widely accepted LOCUS utilization management instrument. ACT was first developed during the early 1970s—the heyday of deinstitutionalization, when large numbers of patients were being discharged from state-operated psychiatric hospitals to an underdeveloped, poorly integrated "nonsystem" of community services characterized by serious "gaps" and "cracks." The founders of the approach were Leonard I. Stein, M.D., Mary Ann Test, Ph.D., Arnold J. Marx, M.D., Deborah J. Allness, M.S.W., William H. Knoedler, M.D., and their colleagues at the Mendota Mental Health Institute, a state hospital in Madison, Wisconsin. Also known in the literature as the Training in Community Living project, the Program of Assertive Community Treatment (PACT), or simply the "Madison model," this innovation seemed radical at the time but has since evolved into one of the most influential service delivery approaches in the history of community mental health. The original Madison project received the American Psychiatric Association's prestigious Gold Award in 1974. After conceiving the model as a strategy to prevent hospitalization in a relatively heterogeneous group of prospective state hospital patients, the PACT team turned its attention in the early 1980s to a more narrowly defined group of young adults with early-stage schizophrenia. Since the late 1970s, the ACT approach has been replicated or adapted widely. The Harbinger program in Grand Rapids, Michigan, is generally recognized as the first replication, and a family-initiated adaptation in Minnesota also traces its origins to the Madison model. Starting in 1978, Jerry Dincin, Ph.D., Thomas F. Witheridge, Ph.D., and their colleagues developed the Bridge program at the Thresholds psychosocial rehabilitation center in Chicago, Illinois—the first big-city adaptation of ACT and the first ACT program to focus on the most frequently hospitalized segment of the mental health consumer population. In the 1980s and '90s, Thresholds further adapted the approach to serve deaf people with mental illness, homeless people with mental illness, people experiencing psychiatric crises, and people with mental illness who were inappropriately caught up in the criminal justice system. In British Columbia, an experimental assertive outreach program based on the Thresholds model was established in 1988 and later expanded to additional sites. Outside of North America, one of the first research-based adaptations was an assertive outreach program in Australia. Other replications or adaptations of the ACT approach can be found throughout the English-speaking world. In Wisconsin, the original Madison model was adapted by its founders for the realities of a sparsely populated rural environment. The Veterans Health Administration has adapted the ACT model for use at multiple sites throughout the United States. There are also major program concentrations in Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana (home of numerous research-based ACT programs and the Indiana ACT Center), Michigan (home of approximately 100 teams and a professional organization called the Assertive Community Treatment Association), Minnesota, Missouri (home of an exemplary program for homeless people with co-occurring mental illness and chemical dependence), New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Virginia, Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom, among other places. Although most of the early PACT replicates and adaptations were funded by grants from federal, state/provincial, or local mental health authorities, there has been a growing tendency to fund these services through Medicaid and other publicly supported health insurance plans. Medicaid funding has been used for ACT services throughout the United States, starting in the late 1980s, when Allness left PACT to head Wisconsin's state mental health agency and led the development of ACT operational standards. Since then, U.S. and Canadian standards have been developed, and many states and provinces have used them in the development of ACT services for individuals with psychiatric disabilities who would otherwise be dependent on more costly, less effective alternatives. Although Medicaid has turned out to be a mixed blessing—it can be difficult to demonstrate a person's eligibility for this insurance program or to find supplemental funding for necessary services that it will not cover—Medicaid reimbursement has led to a long-overdue expansion of ACT in previously unserved or underserved jurisdictions. System planners have attempted to resolve the implementation problems associated with replicating the original Madison approach in sparsely populated rural areas or with low-incidence special populations in urban areas. A related issue for planners is to determine the number of ACT or "ACT-like" programs a particular geographical area needs and can support. Some promising areas for further development are identified below in the section on "Future of ACT." ACT and its variations are among the most widely and intensively studied intervention approaches in community mental health. The original Madison studies by Stein and Test and their colleagues are classics in the field. Another major contributor to the ACT literature has been Gary Bond, Ph.D., who completed several studies at Thresholds in Chicago and later developed a major psychiatric rehabilitation research and training program at Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis. Bond has been particularly influential in the development of fidelity measurement scales for ACT and other evidence-based practices. He and his colleagues (especially Robert E. Drake, M.D., Ph.D., at Dartmouth Medical School) have attempted to consolidate and harmonize several major currents in this continuously developing area of practice, including: Because of its long track record of success with high-priority service recipients in a wide variety of geographical and organizational settings—as demonstrated by a large and growing body of rigorous outcome evaluation studies—ACT has been recognized by the United States federal government's Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI), and the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF), among other recognized arbiters, as an evidence-based practice worthy of widespread dissemination. According to Spindel and Nugent, the main difficulty with PACT (and some other case management approaches) is that there has been no critical analysis of how personally empowering or socially controlling these programs are. PACT does not meet the criteria for being an empowerment approach for "working with disadvantaged, labelled, and stigmatized people". Also, PACT does not have a philosophical base which stresses true individual empowerment. Much literature questions the way that human services are delivered, but this not considered in any evaluation of the PACT approach. In summary, "PACT may be little more than a means of transporting the social control and biomedical functions of the hospital or the institution to the community. For a community mental health system which says that it wants a more progressive approach, PACT simply does not fit the bill". Tomi Gomory, Ph.D., Florida State University, is also critical of PACT:<blockquote>Advocates of Programs of Assertive Community Treatment (PACT) make numerous claims for this intensive intervention program, including reduced hospitalization, overall cost, and clinical symptomatology, and increased client satisfaction, and vocational and social functioning. However, a reanalysis of the controlled experimental research finds no empirical support for any of these claims. </blockquote>Gomory says the chief characteristics of PACT are "intensity, assertiveness, or aggressiveness, which may better be identified as coercion". As Diamond has put it, "The development of Programs for Assertive Community Treatment (PACT), assertive community treatment (ACT) teams and a variety of similar mobile, continuous treatment programs has made it possible to coerce a wide range of behaviors in the community". Gomory says that it is mainly professional enthusiasm for the medical model that is driving an expanded use of PACT, rather than any clear benefit to clients who receive the service. Test and Stein have replied to claims that PACT is inherently coercive and that the research claiming to support it is scientifically invalid, and Gomory, in turn, has answered their reply. Moser and Bond address coercion and the broader concept of "agency control" in a discussion of data from 23 ACT programs. The cost-effectiveness of ACT was relatively easy to demonstrate in the early days, when psychiatric hospital beds were more heavily used than they are now. In the years to come, service planners will have to justify the comparatively high cost of ACT through the continued use of careful admission criteria and rigorous outcome evaluation. The defining characteristics of the ACT approach will remain an attractive framework for services to meet the needs of special populations, such as individuals whose psychiatric symptoms get them into trouble with the criminal justice system, refugees from foreign countries who struggle with the added burden of mental illness, and children and adolescents with serious emotional disturbances. One major piece of unfinished business in the mental health field is the discovery that people with serious mental illnesses are dying, on the average, 25 years earlier than the general public—often from disorders that are inherently preventable or treatable—and this public health disaster is a critical issue for ACT providers and the people they serve. Another important area for future program design and evaluation work is the use of ACT in concert with other established interventions, such as integrated dual disorders treatment, supported employment, family psychoeducation approaches for concerned relatives, and dialectical behavior therapy for individuals diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. Ironically, the dissemination of separate evidence-based practices, not all of which are easily integrated with each other, has once again made service coordination a pivotal issue in community mental health—as it was during the latter part of the 20th century, when ACT was born. 
