 Atypical Facial Pain (AFP) has historically been regarded as a pathological condition, including a wide group of facial pain problems. Generally, this pain is neuropathic in presentation, consisting of burning, superficial or deep-aching, stabbing pain. AFP may also be described as poorly localized, typically involving the nose, eye, cheek, temple, and jaw. Some practitioners have assigned this diagnostic label to any condition of facial pain in which pain simultaneously crosses the mid-line of the face, or otherwise fails to fit recognized patterns of other identified facial pain syndromes. Predominant age: 30 to 60 years and predominant sex is female. Some sources have assigned or categorized Atypical Facial Pain as a psycho-somatic manifestation of so-called "Somatiform Symptom Disorder", as defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association. However, this categorization is increasingly being seen as inappropriate and actively damaging to patients. In a recent publication of the Trigeminal Neuralgia Association (TNA), Dr. Peter Jannetta and eleven other serving members of the TNA Medical Advisory Board concurred in the following finding: Patient often reports symptoms of paresthesia, pain, and throbbing. Physical examination may be normal, but hypoesthesia, hyperesthesia, and allodynia may be found. There are presently no accepted medical tests which consistently discriminate between facial pain syndromes or differentiate Atypical Facial Pain from other syndromes. However, a normal Radiograph, CT, and MRI may help to exclude other pathology such as arterio-veinous malformation, tumor, Temporomandibular Joint Disorder, or MS. 1. Peter J. Jannetta, MD, John F. Alksne, MD, Nicholas M. Barbaro, MD, Jeffrey A. Brown, MD, Kim J. Burchiel, MD, Kenneth F. Casey, MD, Steven B. Graff-Radford, DDS, Mark E. Linskey, MD, Donald R. Nixdorf, MD, Bruce E. Pollock, MD, David A. Sirois, DMD, PhD, Joanna M. Zakrzewska, MD. "Facial Pain experts establish a new pain classification." TNA, the Facial Pain Association, November 2011, http://www.fpa-support.org/2011/10/facial-pain-experts-establish-a-new-pain-classification/ 
