 An auditory brainstem implant (ABI) is a surgically implanted electronic device that provides a sense of sound to a person who is profoundly deaf, due to sensorineural hearing impairment (due to illness or injury damaging the cochlea or auditory nerve, and so precluding the use of a cochlear implant). The auditory brain stem implant uses similar technology as the cochlear implant, but instead of electrical stimulation being used to stimulate the cochlea, it is instead used to stimulate the brain stem of the recipient. Only about a thousand recipients have been implanted with an auditory brain stem implant, due to the nature of the surgery required to implant the device (as it requires brain surgery to implant the device) and the reduced effectiveness of the implant (most auditory brain stem implant recipients only have an awareness of sound - recipients won't be able to hear musical melodies, only the beat). In the United States ABIs are only approved for adults (18 & over) and only for patients with neurofibromatosis type II (NF2).In Europe, ABIs have been used in children and adults, and in patients with NF2 as well as other auditory complications, such as auditory nerve aplasia and cochlea ossification.Colletti et al. 2004, Auditory Brainstem Implant (ABI): New frontiers in adults and Children,Otolarangol head neck surg Speech perception in non-NF2 patients on average has been reported to be higher than that of NF2 patients.Colletti and Shannon 2005, Open Set Speech Perception with Auditory Brainstem Implant? The Larongoscope. The auditory brainstem was first implanted in humans in 1979 at the House Ear Institute, CA, USA. This original ABI consisted of two ball electrodes which were implanted near the surface of the cochlear nucleus. A change from a percutaneous connection to a wireless transcutaneous connection, and from ball electrodes to flat electrodes were the only changes to the implant until 1991, where 25 people had received the ABI.Brackmann et al. 1993, Auditory brainstem implant: I. Issues in surgical implantation, Otol Head Neck Surg In the US in 1992 an eight electrode implant developed by Cochlear Limited, the House Ear Institute and Huntington Medical Research Institute.Otto et al. 1998, The Multichannel Auditory Brainstem Implant: Performance in Twenty Patients, Otol Head Neck Surg An electrode array with 21 electrodes developed by Cochlear Limited was developed for the European market at the same time.Laszig et al. 1991, The Hanover Auditory Brainstem Implant: A Multiple-electrode prosthesis, European Arch Otol Rhinol Laryngol The processor for both the eight and 20 electrode implants used Nucleus 22 ABI (Cochlear Limited) external speech processors. Since 1999 a 21 electrode array implant has been used with the Nucleus 24 ABI (Cochlear Limited) speech processor. A 12 electrode array implant with a speech processor based on the C40+ cochlear implant (Med-El)Jackson et al. 2002, An auditory Brainstem Implant System, Am J Audiol and a 16 electrode array implant with the Clarion-1.2 cochlear implant (Advanced Bionics)Lenarz et al. 2001, Auditory Brainstem Implant: Part 1. Performance and its Evolution Over Time, Otol Neurotol have also been developed. 
