 Autoimmune Hepatitis is a disease of the liver that occurs when the body's immune system attacks cells of the liver. Anomalous presentation of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II on the surface of hepatocytes, possibly due to genetic predisposition or acute liver infection, causes a cell-mediated immune response against the body's own liver, resulting in autoimmune hepatitis. This abnormal immune response results in inflammation of the liver, which can lead to further symptoms and complications such as fatigue and cirrhosis. Autoimmune hepatitis has an incidence of 1-2 per 100,000 per year, and a prevalence of 10-20/100,000. As with most other autoimmune diseases, it affects women much more often than men (70%). Liver enzymes are elevated, as may be bilirubin. The patient is classically a young female. They may present with signs of chronic liver disease (cirrhosis, low albumin, spider nivae etc.) or acute hepatitis (25% present with fever, jaundice, painful hepatomegaly etc.). Commonly, the patient will have amenorrhoea - this may be the presenting complaint. Four subtypes are recognised, but the clinical utility of distinguishing subtypes is limited. The diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis is best achieved with a combination of clinical, laboratory and histological findings. A number of specific antibodies found in the blood (antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA), liver/kidney microsomal antibody (LKM-1, LKM-2, LKM-3), anti soluble liver antigen (SLA/LP) and anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA)) are of use, as is finding an increased Immunoglobulin G level. However, the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis always requires a liver biopsy. Expert opinion has been summarized by the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group, which has published criteria which utilize clinical and laboratory data that can be used to help determine if a patient has autoimmune hepatitis.A calculator based on those criteria is available online. Overlapping presentation with primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing cholangitis has been observed. Treatment may involve the prescription of immunosuppressive glucocorticoids, with or without azathioprine, and remission can be achieved in up to 60–80% of cases, although many will eventually experience a relapse. Budesonide has been shown to be more effective in inducing remission than prednisone, and result in fewer adverse effects. Patients who do not respond to glucocorticoids and azathioprine may be given other immunosuppressives like mycophenolate, cyclosporin, tacrolimus, methotrexate etc. Liver transplantation may be required if patients do not respond to drug therapy or when patients present with fulminant liver failure. 
