 In 2008, by pyrosequencing of cDNA from the brains of several parrots suffering from Proventricular Dilatation Disease (PDD), Honkavouri et al. identified the presence of a novel Borna virus. Using real time PCR, the investigators confirmed the presence of this virus in the brains and proventriculus of three cases of PDD but not in four unaffected birds. At approximately the same time, Kistler and her colleagues used a microarray approach to identify a Borna virus hybridization signature in three out of five PDD cases but not in eight control parrots. Using high-throughput pyrosequencing in combination with conventional PCR cloning and sequencing, these investigators recovered the complete viral genome sequence and named this virus Avian Borna Virus (ABV). At least seven distinct ABV genotypes have now been identified and sequenced. In general these ABV genotypes show only about 65% sequence identity with mammalian Borna disease Virus (BDV). The overall structure of the bornaviral genome is well conserved. Thus the number and order of genes is unchanged as is the structure of transcription initiation and termination sites. Rinder and her colleagues have shown that ABV apparently lacks a 22-nucleotide fragment that serves a regulatory function for the genes coding for viral proteins X and P. Cultured ABV has been shown to induce typical PDD in Patagonian conures (Cyanoliseus patagonus) with a typical interval of 55–60 days between infection and death. Gancz and his colleagues showed that inoculation of ABV4-infected brain tissue will also induce typical disease in cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus) after 60–95 days. Ongoing studies suggest that the virus is spread by the fecal-oral route but it is also possible that respiratory and vertical spread also occur. Avian Bornaviruses (ABV), a group of related viruses, have recently been reported, yet not proven, as the cause of Proventricular Dilatation Disease, PDD, a disease of pet parrots. The use of a 'positive' brain cell culture containing ABV to inoculate another psittacine (parrot) bird resulted in the inoculated bird's death and subsequent histopathological diagnosis of PDD (mononuclear infiltrative ganglioneuritis. Interestingly earlier research with purified inoculant of ABV(while did result in the death of parrots) did not reproduce histopathological changes associated with PDD. Sadly, there have been several parrots tested positive for ABV without clinical signs of PDD that were prematurely euthanized and revealed no such histopathological tissue changes. Additionally some parrots with clinical signs of PDD have been tested negative for ABV and have later died within weeks of testing. These parrots that had clinical signs of PDD, that tested negative for ABV, were then subsequently diagnosed with PDD on histopathology. In summary Avian Bornavirus should not be referred to the cause of Proventricultar Dilation Disease in psittacines, it is of questionable value to test any psittacine bird for ABV, and the only definitive diagnosis of a live parrot for PDD is a crop biopsy with histopathology. Of great importance is that any parrot tested positive for ABV should be retested 90 days later, and persistently ABV positive parrots should be considered as immunocomprimised. PDD is one yet not the only such disease possibly associated with an immunocomprised state. Thankfully, many parrots with signs of PDD have made apparently full recovery with the veterinary use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID's), yet should be considered a potential infective source of PDD for other parrots. 
