 Bacterial flora is a community of bacteria that exists on or in the body, and possesses a unique ecological relationship with the host. Bacterial flora encompasses a wide variety of microorganisms, and the interactions between microbes and host creates a mutualistic relationship that both entities benefit from. Humans in particular provide a diversified ecosystem for a large variety of microbes. An average human adds 37 million bacteria to the air an hour in a given space. The mutualistic relationship has a significant impact on the host, and is thought to influence human traits such as obesity. In 2007, the National Institute of Health started the Human Genome Project designed to help understand the health implications of human bacterial flora. Biologists believe that bacterial flora may play some role in disorders such as Multiple Sclerosis. Additionally, the study of flora can have industrial benefits such as dietary supplements like probiotics. The living microorganisms in probiotics are believed to have positive effects on health, and have been utilized in studies regarding gastrointestinal diseases and allergies. Microbial colonization in the human body begins shortly after birth, and average adults possess 10 times more microbial cells than human cells. The skin acts as a barrier to deter the invasion of pathogenic bacteria. The human skin contains microbes that reside either in or on the skin and can be residential or transient. Resident microorganism types vary in relation to skin type on the human body. A majority of bacteria reside on superficial cells on the skin or prefer to associate with glands. These glands such as oil or sweat glands provide the bacteria with water, amino acids, and fatty acids that provide nutrients for the microbes. In addition, resident bacteria can be pathogenic and are characteristically gram positive bacteria such as certain gram positive bacteria can be associated with oil glands that play a role in acne and skin disease. Moreover, human sweat is by nature odorless, but bacteria associated with the skin play a role in producing body odor. Researchers at Wageningen University in Netherlands discovered that humans with a large number of bacteria that possess a low level of diversity are more attractive to a particular species of mosquito. The experiments were conducted with Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto mosquito, which are associated with malaria. The belly button is an area of the body that is rarely exposed to UV light, soaps, or bodily secretions. According to a study conducted at North Carolina State University, there are two types of microorganisms found in the belly button and surrounding areas. Residential organisms such as dry skin, fats, and proteins, as well as a second type known as transient organisms. Transient bacteria form the majority of the organisms found in the belly button, and an estimated 1400 various strands were found in 95% of participants of the study. The human mouth is an ideal environment of the existence and growth of microorganisms. It provides a source of water and nutrients, as well as a moderate temperature. Resident bacteria of the mouth adhere to the teeth and gums to resist mechanical flushing from the mouth to stomach where they are destroyed by hydrochloric acid. Anaerobic bacteria in the oral cavity include: Actinomyces, Arachnia, Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Eubacterium, Fusobacterium, Lactobacillus, Leptotrichia, Peptococcus, Peptostreptococcus, Propionibacterium, Selenomonas, Treponema, and Veillonella. Much like the oral cavity, the upper and lower respiratory system possess mechanical deterrents to remove bacteria. As a result, the upper and lower respiratory tract does not have a normal bacterial flora. Mucus is produced by goblet cells which trap bacterial and are moved out of the respiratory system via continuously moving ciliated epithelial cells. In addition a bactericidal effect is generated by nasal mucus which contains the enzyme lysozyme. Unusual bacterial flora in the respiratory system can be detrimental and has been seen in patients with cystic fibrosis. The bacterial flora found in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis often contains antibiotic-resistant and slow-growing, and the frequency of these pathogens change in relation to age. The bacterial flora of the human gut encompasses a wide variety of microorganisms that aid in digestion, the synthesis of vitamins, and creating enzymes not produced by the human body. According to scientific research, the human gut consists of different enterotypes that have an inconspicuous impact on human health. It is suggested that the intestines of infants are colonized by bacteria that alter the gut to support those specific bacteria. Due to the high acidity of the stomach, most microorganisms cannot survive. The main bacterial inhabitants of the stomach include: Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Lactobacillus, Peptostreptococcus, and types of yeast. The small intestine contains a trace amount of microorganisms due to the proximity and influence of the stomach. Gram positive cocci and rod shaped bacteria are the most predominate in the small intestine. However, in the distal portion of the small intestine alkaline conditions support gram-positive bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae. The bacterial flora of the small intestine aid in a wide range of intestinal functions. The bacterial flora provide regulatory signals that enable the development and utility of the gut. Overgrowth of bacteria in the small intestine can lead to intestinal failure. In addition the large intestine contains the largest bacterial ecosystem in the human body. Factors that disrupt the microorganism population of the large intestine include antibiotics, stress, and parasites. The most abundant vaginal microorganism found in premenopausal women is Lactobacillus bacteria. Vaginal flora is influenced by a variety of factors including exogenous and endogenous influences. Bacteria type vary in women depending on the stage of the menstrual cycle. Lactic acid bacteria are predominately found during child-bearing years, otherwise the bacterial flora is mixed. Although the menstrual cycle alters vaginal pH and the growth of various organisms, lactobacilli remain at a constant level regardless of the stage of menstruation. In addition, race also influences vaginal flora. The occurrence of hydrogen peroxide-producing lactobacilli is lower in African American women, and vaginal pH is higher. Other influential factors such as sexual intercourse and antibiotics have been linked to the loss of lactobacilli.<ref name="witkin2012" /> Moreover, studies have found that sexual intercourse with a condom does appear to change lactobacilli levels, and does increase the level of Escherichia coli within the vaginal flora.<ref name="witkin2012" /> Disruption of vaginal flora can lead to infections such as vaginal candidiasis or bacterial vaginosis (BV).<ref name="witkin2012" /> 
