 Barrow Neurological Institute (BNI) is a neurological disease treatment and research institution founded in 1961. The main campus is located at 310 W. Thomas Road, Phoenix, Arizona. Barrow Neurological Institute (BNI) at St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center is the world's largest dedicated neurosurgical center and a leader in neurosurgical training, research, and patient care. Under the directorship of Dr. Robert F. Spetzler, the institution's unique capabilities and achievements are recognized internationally. Initially started by Dr. John Green as a regional center for patients with neurosurgical issues, the institution has rapidly expanded over the last 30 years. Barrow receives referrals from all over the world and is internationally-recognized for the treatment of disorders such as cerebrovascular aneurysms, hypothalamic hamartomas and other brain tumors, complex spinal disorders, stroke and Parkinson's disease at the Muhammad Ali Parkinson Center. The center is home to the largest neurosurgical residency program in the United States, and hundreds of neurosurgeons from around the world visit yearly to attend the Spetzler-Rhoton Skull Base Course and the Barrow Symposium.<ref name= kick>Kick SA, Sonntag VK, Spetzler RF. Neurosurgery at the Barrow Neurological Institute. Neurosurgery. 1997 Oct;41(4):930-7. The clinical volume of the BNI is unparalleled by any other institution in the world. There are 11 dedicated neurosurgical ORs, with typically 2 cases per room, averaging 18 to 20 cases per weekday and 100 cases per week. Previous figures reported to the ACGME for re-accreditation in 2007-8 academic year was a total of 6,681 cases (not including the majority of supplementary procedures). Additionally, the institution is home to 64 dedicated neurosurgical ICU beds, the largest of its kind in the world. Case Volume (Approx.)<ref name= brochure>Barrow Residency Brochure. http://www.stjosephs-phx.org/stellent/groups/public/@xinternet_con_sjh/documents/webcontent/201172.pdf Stereotactic radiosurgery 475 Endovascular >700 Vascular 1068 Tumor 1423 Functional 448 Cranial Trauma 252 Reconstruction 53 CSF Diversion 463 Misc Cranial 1370 Degenerative Disc 1093 Spinal Tumors/Vascular 121 Spine Trauma 134 Dysraphism 10 Pain/Spasm 93 Peripheral Nerve 90 Spine Misc 13 The neurosurgical operating rooms at Barrow Neurological Institute were completed in 2006 Each operating room is typically about two times the size of a traditional operating room and fitted with three 64-inch plasma screens, two high definition cameras, and access to a single 3T intraoperative MRI. These 11 dedicated neurosurgical operating rooms with ancillary staff sub-specialized only in neurosurgical care, are the most of any single institution in the world. Additionally, the new BNI towers contain more than 64 dedicated neurosurgical ICU beds, as well as more than 80 Neuroacute floor beds to accommodate Barrow's high patient volume. This represents the largest neurosciences ICU and Acute beds in the world. Barrow accepts four residents per year to its neurological surgery residency program, making it the largest program of its kind in the country. Due to Barrow's high clinical volume and emphasis on resident education, the center has garnered a reputation for producing technical masters in numerous fields within neurosurgery, and has become one of the most sought out after neurosurgical training program in the world. In the last thirty years, the Barrow has produced arguably the most influential collection of neurosurgeons in the modern era. The BNI also offers three fellowships: Cerebrovascular under the direction of Dr. Robert F. Spetzler, Neuroendovascular under the direction of Drs. Felipe C. Albuquerque and Cameron G. McDougall, and Spinal Neurosurgery under the direction of Dr. Nicholas Theodore. 
