 Bcl-2 (B-cell lymphoma 2), encoded by the BCL2 gene, is the founding member of the Bcl-2 family of regulator proteins that regulate cell death (apoptosis). Bcl-2 derives its name from B-cell lymphoma 2, as it is the second member of a range of proteins initially described in chromosomal translocations involving chromosomes 14 and 18 in follicular lymphomas. Bcl-2 orthologs have been identified in numerous mammals for which complete genome data are available. The two isoforms of Bcl-2, Isoform 1, also known as 1G5M, and Isoform 2, also known as 1G5O/1GJH, exhibit similar fold. However, results in the ability of these isoforms to bind to the BAD and BAK proteins, as well as in the structural topology and electrostatic potential of the binding groove, suggest differences in antiapoptotic activity for the two isoforms Damage to the Bcl-2 gene has been identified as a cause of a number of cancers, including melanoma, breast, prostate, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and lung cancer, and a possible cause of schizophrenia and autoimmunity. It is also a cause of resistance to cancer treatments. Cancer occurs as the result of a disturbance in the homeostatic balance between cell growth and cell death. Over-expression of anti-apoptotic genes, and under-expresion of pro-apoptotic genes, can result in the lack of cell death that is characteristic of cancer. An example can be seen in lymphomas. The over-expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein in lymphocytes alone does not cause cancer. But simultaneous over-expression of Bcl-2 and the proto-oncogene myc may produce aggressive B-cell malignancies including lymphoma.In follicular lymphoma, a chromosomal translocation commonly occurs between the fourteenth and the eighteenth chromosomes—t(14;18) — which places the Bcl-2 gene next to the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus. This fusion gene is deregulated, leading to the transcription of excessively high levels of Bcl-2. This decreases the propensity of these cells for undergoing apoptosis. Apoptosis also plays a very active role in regulating the immune system. When it is functional, it can cause immune unresponsiveness to self-antigens via both central and peripheral tolerance. In the case of defective apoptosis, it may contribute to etiological aspects of autoimmune diseases. The autoimmune disease, type 1 diabetes can be caused by defective apoptosis, which leads to aberrant T cell AICD and defective peripheral tolerance. Due to the fact that dendritic cells are the most important antigen presenting cells of the immune system, their activity must be tightly regulated by such mechanisms as apoptosis. Researchers have found that mice containing dendritic cells that are Bim -/-, thus unable to induce effective apoptosis, obtain autoimmune diseases more so than those that have normal dendritic cells. Other studies have shown that the lifespan of dendritic cells may be partly controlled by a timer dependent on anti-apoptotic Bcl-2. Apoptosis plays a very important role in regulating a variety of diseases that have enormous social impacts. For example, schizophrenia is a neurodegenerative disease that may result from an abnormal ratio of pro- and anti-apoptotic factors. There is some evidence that this defective apoptosis may result from abnormal expression of Bcl-2 and increased expression of caspase-3. Further research into the family of Bcl-2 proteins will provide a more complete picture on how these proteins interact with each other to promote and inhibit apoptosis. An understanding of the mechanisms involved may help develop new therapies for treating cancer, autoimmune conditions, and neurological diseases. Antibodies to Bcl-2 can be used with immunohistochemistry to identify cells containing the antigen. In healthy tissue, these antibodies will react with B-cells in the mantle zone, as well as some T-cells. However, there is a considerable increase in positive cells in follicular lymphoma, as well as many other forms of cancer. In some cases, the presence or absence of Bcl-2 staining in biopsies may be significant for the patient's prognosis or likelihood of relapse. Bcl-2 inhibitors include : An antisense oligonucleotide drug Genasense (G3139) has been developed by Genta Incorporated to target Bcl-2. An antisense DNA or RNA strand is non-coding and complementary to the coding strand (which is the template for producing respectively RNA or protein). An antisense drug is a short sequence of RNA that hybridises with and inactivates mRNA, preventing the protein from being formed. It was shown that the proliferation of human lymphoma cells (with t(14;18) translocation) could be inhibited by antisense RNA targeted at the start codon region of Bcl-2 mRNA. In vitro studies led to the identification of Genasense, which is complementary to the first 6 codons of Bcl-2 mRNA. These have shown successful results in Phase I/II trials for lymphoma, and a large Phase III trial was launched in 2004 By the first quarter 2010, Genasense had not received FDA approval due to disappointing results in a melanoma trial. Although safety and efficacy of Genasense have not been established for any use, Genta Incorporated still claims on its website that studies are currently underway to examine the potential role of Genasense in a variety of clinical indications. Abbott Laboratories described in the mid-2000s a novel inhibitor of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Bcl-w, known as ABT-737. ABT-737 is one among many so-called BH3 mimetic small molecule inhibitors (SMI) targeting Bcl-2 and Bcl-2-related proteins such as Bcl-xL and Bcl-w but not A1 and Mcl-1, which may prove valuable in the therapy of lymphoma and other blood cancers. A Phase Ia trial is currently ongoing to study the effects of agent, ABT-199, a so-called BH3-mimetic drug designed to block the function of the Bcl-2 protein, on patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. January 17, 2013The study had suspended participant recruitment per a temporary hold Bcl-2 has been shown to interact with RAD9A, BAK1, Reticulon 4, Bcl-2-associated X protein, Caspase 8, BECN1, SOD1, Bcl-2-interacting killer, BH3 interacting domain death agonist, RRAS, C-Raf, BCL2L11, BNIPL, HRK, PSEN1, BMF, BNIP2, BNIP3, Nerve Growth factor IB, BCL2-like 1, Myc, BCAP31, SMN1, CAPN2, PPP2CA, Noxa, Cdk1, TP53BP2, Bcl-2-associated death promoter and IRS1. BAK; BAK1; BAX; BCL2; BCL2A1; BCL2L1; BCL2L10; BCL2L13;BCL2L14; BCL2L2; BCL2L7P1; BOK; MCL1; LGALS7 (Galectin-7) 
