 benenden health is the trading style for The Benenden Healthcare Society Limited, a UK-based mutual not-for-profit friendly society run for members, providing a range of discretionary healthcare services for a membership of over 900,000 across the UK. All members and nominees pay the same flat rate per week, regardless of their circumstances. Current rate (as at January 2013) is £7.80 per person, per month. It uses the slogan 'because life is precious'. benenden group is a trading style for The Benenden Healthcare Society Limited and its subsidiaries: benenden health, benenden insurance, benenden hospital & benenden charitable trust. benenden health also specialises in business healthcare schemes - designed to contribute to staff benefits packages and help manage sickness absence. benenden health is shirt sponsor of York City Football Club for the 2012-2013 season. The organisation that is now benenden health was founded in 1905 to help Post Office workers suffering from tuberculosis (TB). At that time TB was rife, especially among sorting clerks. It was killing many thousands of people a year. Only the very wealthy could afford medical help or a trip to a Swiss Sanatorium to recuperate in the fresh air. One man had a radical idea to overcome the problem. Charles Garland, a Post Office clerk himself, decided to create a mutual self-help organisation so that the less well off could get access to the healthcare they so desperately needed. Everyone would contribute a small weekly amount into a fund. It would be used to help their colleagues or themselves if they were unlucky enough to contract TB. In the early days, it was known as The Post Office Sanatorium Society. In 1923, Civil Servants joined the organisation and it became The Post Office and Civil Service Sanatorium Society. Since then it has grown and developed into a modern healthcare organisation with its current legal name The Benenden Healthcare Society Limited and trading style benenden health. Ahead of its Time, a film about benenden health's history was made by Trafalgar Productions in 2011. benenden health's registered office and main HQ has been based in York since October 1990, it was previously based in London. In June 2012, delegates at benenden health's Annual Conference in Manchester voted to remove the last of its membership eligibility criteria, meaning that anyone in the UK aged 16 and over can now join benenden health. benenden health can provide treatment for many conditions, as well as help with a wide variety of surgical procedures. In a survey conducted by Progressive Partnership in December 2011, 99% of members surveyed were satisfied with the overall service provided by the Society. benenden health members can receive treatment at benenden hospital or at benenden-approved private hospitals located across the UK. Benenden bospital was founded in 1907 and became the centre for hospital treatment for members of Trade Unions and Friendly Societies and subsequently large numbers of public sector employees who joined what is now benenden health. The services provided at the hospital have moved with the times. From treatment for tuberculosis, which was its original role, to the management of chest diseases, to the current day where the hospital provides a wide range of consultation, diagnosis and treatment services for most medical and surgical specialties. In recent years the hospital has increasingly been able to provide services for patients who are not members of benenden health. Local National Health Service agencies are increasing their use of the hospital's facilities, as are patients who use private medical insurance or who pay directly for their own hospital care. The hospital provides a range of clinical services which are tailored to meet the needs of individual patients. The hospital has a Modern Matron – a senior and experienced professional – who has the authority to resolve problems and to make sure the 'patient pathway' is both effective and patient friendly. The hospital enjoys a beautiful location in the heart of rural Kent and yet is accessible by road or by rail from many parts of south and south east England. January 2013 benenden health enables free mid-season shirt swap with York City FC due to rebrand. Source: http://www.yorkcityfootballclub.co.uk/news.php?id=3851 January 2013 Benenden Healthcare Society rebrands with new trading style 'benenden health'. Source: https://www.benenden.co.uk/media-centre/benenden-healthcare-rebrands-and-looks-to-grow-in-tough-healthcare-market/ June 2012: benenden health's Annual Conference votes to open membership to all. Source: https://www.benenden.co.uk/media-centre/benenden-healthcare-set-to-open-doors-to-all/ June 2012: benenden health is voted UK's 'most trusted' private healthcare provider for the second year running in the Moneywise Most Trusted awards. Source: https://www.benenden.co.uk/media-centre/benenden-healthcare-scoops-prestigious-national-award-for-second-year-running/ June 2012: benenden health becomes shirt sponsor of York City Football Club. Source: https://www.benenden.co.uk/media-centre/benenden-healthcare-to-support-wembley-winners-york-city-fc-in-forthcoming-season/ 
