 A bicornuate uterus or bicornate uterus, commonly referred to as a "heart-shaped" uterus, is a type of uterine malformation where two "horns" form at the upper part of the uterus. A bicornuate uterus is formed during embryogenesis. The fusion process of the upper part of the M端llerian ducts (Paramesonephric ducts) is altered. As a result the caudal part of the uterus is normal while the cephalo part is bifurcated. There are many degrees of a bicornuate uterus.There is a continuous range of the degree and location of the M端llerian ducts (Paramesonephric ducts) fusion and existence of a spectrum rather than a fixed number of types corresponding to strict medical definitions.Two processes that occur during the embryonic development of the M端llerian ducts - fusion and reabsorption - can be affected to different degrees.The degree can determine the likeliness of a pregnancy reaching full-term. The occurrence of all types of M端llerian duct abnormalities in women is estimated around 0.4%.A bicornuate uterus is estimated to occur in 0.1-0.5% of women in the U.S.It is possible that this is an underestimate since subtle abnormalities often go undetected. Some intersex individuals who by the look of their external genitalia are legally registered as male may nonetheless have a variably shaped uterus. Pregnancies in a bicornuate uterus are usually considered high-risk and require extra monitoring because of association with poor reproduction potential. A bicornuate uterus is associated with increased adverse reproductive outcomes like: Previously, a bicornuate uterus was thought to be associated with infertility, but recent studies have not confirmed such an association. It is possible to diagnose a bicornuate uterus using gynecologic sonography, specifically sonohysterography, and MRI. However, as there is no indication to do such procedures on asymptomatic women, the presence of a bicornuate uterus may not be detected until during pregnancy or delivery. In a C-section (usually done due to malpresentation) the irregular shape of the uterus can be noticed. Other less reliable imaging methods include hysterosalpingography and hysteroscopy; these procedures are typically done during the course of an infertility investigation. 
