 Bimatoprost (marketed in the U.S., Canada and Europe by Allergan, under the trade name Lumigan) is a prostaglandin analog/prodrug used topically (as eye drops) to control the progression of glaucoma and in the management of ocular hypertension. It reduces intraocular pressure (IOP) by increasing the outflow of aqueous fluid from the eyes. It has also been used and prescribed off-label to lengthen eyelashes. In December 2008, this use was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA); the cosmetic formulation of bimatoprost is sold as Latisse (). In 2008-2011, at least three case series suggested that bimatoprost has the ability to reduce adipose (fat) tissue. In patients using ophthalmic prostaglandins such as travoprost and latanoprost, it has been anecdotally noted that there had been an increase in diameter, density and length of eyelashes. Allergan has initiated clinical trials investigating the usage of Lumigan as a cosmetic drug. On December 5, 2008, the FDA Dermatologic and Ophthalmic Drugs Advisory Committee voted to approve bimatoprost for the cosmetic use of darkening and lengthening eyelashes. The medical term for this is treatment of hypotrichosis, however, the FDA approval is for purely cosmetic purposes. For cosmetic purposes, it is administered once daily by applying the solution to the skin at the base of the eyelash using an applicator device "Application Guide", where it has its effect upon the hair follicle. Bimatoprost activates prostamide alpha F2 receptors found in the hair follicle to stimulate its growth rate. Research led by Professor Randall and the University of Bradford found that it may also offer a treatment for scalp hair regrowth in trials conducted on samples taken from men undergoing hair transplants. According to Allergan's package labeling, users of its Latisse cosmetic product didn't develop darker irises in clinical studies; however, "patients should be advised about the potential for increased brown iris pigmentation which is likely to be permanent." Several cosmetics companies have released products based on prostaglandin analogs, as non-drug cosmetics. These companies have been sued by Allergan for patent infringement. The FDA has seized Age Intervention Eyelash as an "unapproved and misbranded drug" because Jan Marini Skin Research promoted it as something that increases eyelash growth and because it is "adulterated" with bimatoprost. Reductions in orbital fat (i.e., fat around the eye) have been observed in patients using bimatoprost as glaucoma therapy. Of particular interest, the loss of orbital fat was unilateral in patients who used bimatoprost on only one eye. The effect appears reversible upon cessation of bimatoprost use. The effect is likely to explain deepening of the lid sulcus described in a series of three patients on bimatoprost. The mechanism for the apparent fat reduction remains unclear. However, bimatoprost is chemically analogous to prostaglandin F<sub>2α</sub> (PGF<sub>2α</sub>), a compound which is known to reduce fat by inhibition of adipocyte differentiation and survival. Lumigan is a 0.03% solution of bimatoprost, and contains benzalkonium chloride as a preservative. Contact lenses should therefore be removed before use, and replaced no less than 15 minutes later; other eye drops or ointments should be given no less than five minutes before or after bimatoprost. Studies have shown once-daily bimatoprost 0.03% ophthalmic solution to be more effective than timolol twice daily in reduction of intraocular pressure (IOP) and as effective as or more effective than the prostaglandin analogues latanoprost and travoprost in reducing IOP. Possible side effects of this medication are: On November 19, 2007, the FDA issued a warning during the seizure of a bimatoprost-containing cosmetic. The warning stated that "the extra dose of bimatoprost may decrease the prescription drug's effectiveness. Damage to the optic nerve may lead to decreased vision and possibly blindness." 
