 Boudreaux's Butt Paste is an American brand of skin cream that started out as a remedy for diaper rash. It has also been used for the treatment of various skin ailments including psoriasis, jock itch, shingles, cold sores and acne. The product was originally created in the 1970s by George Boudreaux of Covington, Louisiana while he was working as an intern pharmacist. He continued to work on the formula after becoming a licensed pharmacist and sold it at his pharmacy, later naming it "Boudreaux's Butt Paste" after a doctor told him a story about a patient that had referred to the product as such. Boudreaux began distributing the product more extensively after he sold his pharmacy in 1974. Manufacturing moved from Alabama to New Orleans in 2004. After Oprah Winfrey recommended the product on her show the response was so great that the company's website crashed, and demand for Boudreaux's Butt Paste quadrupled. When Brad Pitt talked of a "horrible diaper rash" in two of his children, a People magazine article asked readers for advice. It reported that in under five hours almost 900 readers responded, recommending Boudreaux's Butt Paste "overwhelmingly". In 2006 a 14-foot tide caused by Hurricane Katrina hit the area where Boudreaux's Butt Paste was manufactured, so emergency production was moved to Indiana. Soon after, the company was sold to Blairex Industries in Columbus, Indiana. On December 29, 2011, Blairex sold the brand to C.B. Fleet Company, Inc. The brand became a NASCAR sponsor beginning with a Junie Donlavey-owned car driven by Kevin Ray in the Nextel Cup Series and Kim Crosby's #24 Butt Paste Chevrolet, run by GIC-Mixon Motorsports in the Busch Series. A NASCAR spokesman said to USA Today: "I think it's very fitting that Junie Donlavey, who has brought more drivers into the world of NASCAR than any other owner, is now being sponsored by a baby product." In 2008, due to Boudreaux's Butt Paste ads on the car, Ray's No. 90 Ford was named the fifth scariest NASCAR paint scheme of all time by ESPN The Magazine for having " BUTT PASTE" slapped on the rear quarter panels in giant red lettering and a cartoon baby riding on the hood'. The combination of ingredients are: Earlier formulations contained boric acid or citric acid. Boric acid was removed because of toxicity concerns, and citric acid was removed because it irritated skin. 
