 The British Heart Foundation (or BHF) is a charity organisation in Britain that funds research, education, care and awareness campaigns aimed to prevent heart diseases in humans. The British Heart Foundation was founded in 1961 by a group of medical professionals who were concerned about the increasing death rate from cardiovascular disease. They wanted to fund extra research into the causes, diagnosis, treatment and prevention of heart and circulatory disease. It is a major funder and authority in cardiovascular research, education and care, and relies predominantly on voluntary donations to meet its aims. In order to increase income and maximise the impact of its work, it also works with other organisations to combat premature death and disability from cardiovascular disease. A full history can be found at: [1] The British Heart Foundation focuses on five areas of cardiovascular health: In 2006 The British Heart Foundation had an income of just over £100m. In 2010 the BHF spent their income on Research (57%), care and prevention (43%). BHF invested a net £48.4 million in research during the year. In Prevention and Care, as well asfunding their ongoing activity in healthcare professionals (£2.5 million), placingdefibrillators in places of need (£1.4 million) and producing heart health resources forall age groups. BHF also invested £4 million in four new large programmes and ten cluster projects under the Hearty Lives initiative. They also invested £0.5 million in their Heart Information Series. Case studies of how BHF work has helped individuals can be found in their here [2]. This includes examples of their research work and local volunteering activity. The British Heart Foundation sponsored two television series produced by Twofour, Kitchen Detective and Kid's Fit Squad. Both series encouraged healthy eating and exercise with practical advice for families, and aired on the [[Discovery Home & Health|Discovery Health]] channel. The BHF, along with Cancer Research UK, is a major backer of the anti-tobacco campaign group Action on Smoking and Health. The BHF is mainly funded by legacies and wills, accounting for 44% of their income, the other 56% is made up of other voluntary income (32%), profit from the retail division (19%) and investment income (5%) The charity organises a sponsored skipping challenge through schools, in which the participating schools are entitled to retain 20% of the money raised. Other annual campaigns include National Heart Month (held throughout February), Wear Red Day and The Big Donation as well as many other campaigns to recruit volunteers, raise awareness of BHF, sell stock and increase donations. British duo Knock Twice released their debut single "I Heart You"[3] in aid of the British Heart Foundation on 8 February 2010. In December 2010 Victoria Wood performed a show called "The Angina Monologues" for The British Heart Foundation with the strapline "Beating Heart Disease one laugh at a time". The British Heart Foundation Shops Division was founded in 1986, and was renamed Retail Division in 2010. The BHF run a large chain of charity shops throughout England, Wales and Scotland, as of April 2010 they run over 600 standard retail shops and 87 furniture and electrical shops (or F+E shops), and they are looking to acquire 100 more sites in the coming years. The BHF Retail division makes roughly £16 million every year accounting for 13% of the overall income of BHF, an increase of £1 million from the previous year, and £2 million the year before that. BHF shops are predominantly staffed by roughly 10,000 volunteers and each shop also has a paid staff made up of a shop manager, assistant manager and may also have a shop assistant. The British Heart Foundation were the first charity shops to Gift Aid their donations to get extra money by claiming the tax back from the donor. In early 2010, the BHF digital checkout switchover went live, and currently most shops have new digital tills, as opposed to the old analogue tills, the new tills include bar code scanners, touch screen interface, separate till roll printer, colour printer and instant information upload to HQ. The Retail Director is Mike Lucas and the headquarters of the retail division is based in Claygate, England.The BHF has 600 shops across England and Wales. The charity is one of 4 organisations subject to a national boycott campaign regarding their usage of animal testing. "Animal Aid plans to take out a series of newspaper adverts urging the public to stop giving money to Cancer Research UK, the British Heart Foundation, the Alzheimer's Society and Parkinson's UK unless they end their support for animal testing. " In November 2011 a protest took place calling for the BHF and the University of Leeds to stop carrying out co-funded "lethal experiments" on dogs. The pressure group Animal Aid stated that 100 dogs had died since 1988 during the experiments. 
