 In medicine, the BUN-to-creatinine ratio is the ratio of two serum laboratory values, the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (mg/dL) and serum creatinine (mg/dL) (Cr). Outside the United States, particularly in Canada and Europe, the truncated term urea is used (though it is still the same blood chemical) and the units are different (mmol/L). The units of creatinine are also different (umol/L), and this value is termed the urea-to-creatinine ratio. The ratio may be used to determine the cause of acute kidney injury or dehydration. The principle behind this ratio is the fact that both urea (BUN) and creatinine are freely filtered by the glomerulus, however urea reabsorbed by the tubules can be regulated (increased or decreased) whereas creatinine reabsorption remains the same (minimal reabsorption). Normal serum values Test SI units US units BUN (Urea) 7–20 mg/dL Urea 2.5-10.7 mmol/L Creatinine 62-106 μmol/L 0.7-1.2 mg/dL Serum Ratios BUN:Cr UNa Location Mechanism >20:1 >100:1 Prerenal (before the kidney) BUN reabsorption is increased. BUN is disproportionately elevated relative to creatinine in serum. Dehydration is suspected. 10-20:1 40-100:1 Normal or Postrenal (after the kidney) Normal range. Can also be postrenal disease. BUN reabsorption is within normal limits. <10:1 <40:1 Intrarenal (within kidney) Renal damage causes reduced reabsorption of BUN, therefore lowering the BUN:Cr ratio. An elevated BUN:Cr due to a low or low-normal creatinine and a BUN within the reference range is unlikely to be of clinical significance. The ratio is predictive of prerenal injury when BUN:Cr exceeds 20 or when urea:Cr exceeds 100 and urea is greater than 10. In prerenal injury, urea increases disproportionately to creatinine due to enhanced proximal tubular reabsorption that follows the enhanced transport of sodium and water. The ratio is useful for the diagnosis of bleeding from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in patients who do not present with overt vomiting of blood. In children, a BUN:Cr ratio of 30 or greater has a sensitivity of 68.8% and a specificity of 98% for upper gastrointestinal bleeding. A common assumption is that the ratio is elevated because of amino acid digestion, since blood, (excluding water) consists largely of the protein hemoglobin, is broken down by digestive enzymes of the upper GI tract into amino acids, which are then reabsorbed in the GI tract and broken down into urea. However, elevated BUN:Cr ratios are not observed when other high protein loads (e.g., steak) are consumed. Renal hypoperfusion secondary to the blood lost from the GI bleed has been postulated to explain the elevated BUN:Cr ratio. However, other research has found that renal hypoperfusion cannot fully explain the elevation. Because of decreased muscle mass, elderly patients may have an elevated BUN:Cr at baseline. Hypercatabolic states, high-dose glucocorticoids, and resorption of large hematomas have all been cited as causes of a disproportionate rise in BUN relative to the creatinine. 
