 Burning mouth syndrome (BMS also termed glossodynia, orodynia, oral dysaesthesia, glossopyrosis, stomatodynia, burning tongue, stomatopyrosis, sore tongue, burning tongue syndrome, burning mouth, or sore mouth) is the complaint of a burning sensation in the mouth where no underlying dental or medical cause can be identified and no oral signs are found. Burning mouth syndrome may also comprise subjective xerostomia (a dry mouth sensation where no cause can be found such as hyposalivation), oral paraesthesia (e.g. tingling) and altered taste or smell (dysgeusia and dysosmia). A burning sensation in the mouth can be a symptom of another disease when local or systemic factors are found to be implicated, and this is not considered to be burning mouth syndrome, which is a syndrome of medically unexplained symptoms. The International Association for the Study of Pain definition of burning mouth syndrome is ‘a distinctive nosological entity characterized by unremitting oral burning or similar pain in the absence of detectable mucosal changes’, and the International Headache Society definition is 'an intra-oral burning sensation for which no medical or dental cause can be found'. A burning sensation in the mouth may be primary (i.e. burning mouth syndrome) or secondary to systemic or local factors. Other sources refer to a "secondary BMS" with a similar definition, i.e. a burning sensation which is caused by local or systemic factors, however this contradicts the accepted definition of BMS which specifies that no cause can be identified. "Secondary BMS" could therefore be considered a misnomer. BMS is an example of dysesthesia, or a distortion of sensation. Some consider BMS to be a variant of atypical facial pain. BMS has been subdivided into three general types, with type two being the most common and type three being the least common. Types one and two have unremitting symptoms, whereas type three may show remitting symptoms. By definition, BMS has no signs. Sometimes affected persons will attribute the symptoms to sores in the mouth, but these are in fact normal anatomic structures (e.g. lingual papillae, varices). Symptoms of BMS are variable, but the typical clinical picture is given in the table. If clinical signs are visible, then another explanation for the burning sensation may be present. Erythema (redness) and edema (swelling) of papillae on the tip of the tongue may be a sign that the tongue is being habitually pressed against the teeth. The number and size of filiform papillae may be reduced. If the tongue is very red and smooth, then there is likely a local or systemic cause (e.g. eythematous candidiasis, anemia). Parameter !! Usual findings in burning mouth syndrome Site Usually bilaterally located on the tongue or less commonly the palate, lips or lower alveolar mucosa Onset Pain is chronic, and rarely spontaneously remits Character Burning, scalded or tingling. Sometimes the sensation is described as 'discomfort', 'tender', 'raw' and 'annoying' rather than pain or burning. Radiation Associations Possibly subjective xerostomia, dysgeusia (altered taste), thirst, headaches, chronic back pain, irritable bowel syndrome, dysmenorrhea, globus pharyngis, anxiety, decreased appetite, depression and personality disorders Time course Type 2 (most common) pain upon waking and throughout day, less commonly other patterns. Exacerbating/Relieving factors || Pain is often relieved by alcohol, or eating and drinking (unlike pain caused by organic lesions or neuralgia) or when the person's attention is occupied. Pain is not often relived by analgesics. Sometimes eating hot, acidic or spicy food or drink exacerbates pain. Severity Moderate to severe, rated 5-8 out of 10, similar in intensity to toothache Effect on sleep May not disturb sleep, or may change sleep patterns, e.g. insomnia. Previous treatment Often multiple consultations and unsuccessful attempts at dental and/or medical treatment About 50% of cases where there is a burning sensation in the mouth have no identifiable cause. The cause of BMS is unknown. Several theories have been proposed, and these are supported by varying degrees of evidence, but none is proven. As most people with BMS are postmenopausal women, one theory of the cause of BMS is of estrogen or progesterone deficit, but a strong statistical correlation has not been demonstrated. Another theory is that BMS is related to autoimmunity, as abnormal antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor can be found in the serum of more than 50% of persons with BMS, but these levels may also be seen in elderly people who do not have any of the symptoms of this condition. Whilst salivary flow rates are normal and there are no clinical signs of a dry mouth to explain a complaint of dry mouth, levels of salivary proteins and phosphate may be elevated and salivary pH or buffering capacity may be reduced. Depression and anxiety are common in this group. It is not known if depression is a cause or result of BMS, as it may develop in the setting of constant unrelieved pain and sleep disturbance. BMS has been proposed to be a psychosomatic illness, caused by cancerophobia or other form of hypochondriasis. Chronic low-grade trauma due to parafunctional habits (e.g. rubbing the tongue against the teeth or pressing it against the palate), may be involved. BMS is more common in persons with Parkinson’s disease, so it has been suggested that it is a disorder of reduced pain threshold and increased sensitivity. Often people with BMS have unusually raised taste sensitivity ("super tasters") Dysgeusia (usually a bitter or metallic taste) is present in about 60% of people with BMS, a factor which lead to the concept of a defect in sensory peripheral neural mechanisms. Changes in the oral environment, such as changes in the composition of saliva, may induce neuropathy or interruption of nerve transduction. The onset of BMS is often spontaneous, although it may be gradual. There is sometimes a correlation with a major life event or stressful period in life. In women, the onset of BMS is most likely three to twelve years following menopause. Substances capable of causing an oral burning sensation. Foods and additives Benzoic acid Chestnuts Cinnamaldehyde Instant coffee Nicotinic acid Peanuts Sodium metabisulphite Sorbic acid Metals Plastics Several local and systemic factors can give a burning sensation in the mouth without any clinical signs, and therefore may be misdiagnosed as BMS. Other causes of a burning mouth sensation may have clinical signs in the mouth or elsewhere on the body. One suggested cause of burning mouth pain is a contact sensitivity Type IV hypersensitivity in the oral tissues to common substances such as sodium lauryl sulfate, cinnamaldehyde or dental materials.<ref name="Andrews" /> However, inflammatory, lichenoid (lesions resembling oral lichen planus), or ulcerative lesions are present in cases of true contact sensitivity. BMS is a diagnosis of exclusion, i.e. all other explanations for the symptoms are ruled out before the diagnosis is made.<ref name="Scully 2008" /> There are no clinically useful investigations that would help to support a diagnosis of BMS<ref name="Zakrzewska 2005" /> (by definition all tests would have normal results),<ref name="Scully 2008" /> but blood tests and / or urinalysis may be useful to rule out anemia, deficiency states, hypothyroidism and diabetes. Investigation of a dry mouth symptom may involve sialometry, which objectively determines if there is any reduction of the salivary flow rate (hyposalivation). Oral candidiasis can be tested for with use of a swabs, smears, an oral rinse or saliva samples.<ref name="Coulthard 2008" /> It has been suggested that allergy testing (e.g. patch test) is inappropriate in the absence of a clear history and clinical signs in people with a burning sensation in the mouth.<ref name="Coulthard 2008" /> The diagnosis of a people with a burning symptom may also involve psychologic screening e.g. depression questionnaires.<ref name="Scully 2008" /> If a cause can be identified for a burning sensation in the mouth, then treatment of these underlying factor(s) will be cause related, and the symptom may resolve or persist despite treatment (which confirms a diagnosis of BMS).<ref name="Coulthard 2008" /> BMS has been traditionally treated by reassurance and with antidepressants, anxiolytics or anticonvulsants. However a systematic review of treatments for BMS concluded that clear, conclusive evidence of an effective treatment was not available in published research.<ref name="Zakrzewska 2005" /> There is a suggestion that Alpha lipoic acid and clonazepam (a benzodiazepine) may have some benefit, but the research methods used in these randomized control trials were imperfect or their results have not been corroborated by multiple trials. Similarly with the results of one randomized control trial which reported some evidence that cognitive behavioral therapy may be beneficial.<ref name="Zakrzewska 2005" /> BMS is benign (importantly, it is not a symptom of oral cancer), but as a cause of chronic pain which is poorly controlled, it can detriment quality of life, and may become a fixation which cannot be ignored, thus interfering with work and other daily activities.<ref name="Treister 2010" /> Two thirds of people with BMS have a spontaneous partial recovery six to seven years after the initial onset, but in others the condition is permanent.<ref name="Bouquot 2002" /><ref name="Grushka 2002" /> Recovery is often preceded by a change in the character of the symptom from constant to intermittent.<ref name="Grushka 2002" /> No clinical factors predicting recovery have been noted.<ref name="Grushka 2002" /> BMS is fairly common worldwide, and affects up to five individuals per 100,000 general population. People with BMS are more likely to be middle aged or elderly, and females are three to seven times more likely to have BMS than males.<ref name="Scully 2008" /> Some report a female to male ratio of as much as 33 to 1.<ref name="Mock 2010" /> BMS is reported in about 10-40% of women seeking medical treatment for menopausal symptoms, and BMS occurs in about 14% of postmenopausal women.<ref name="Bouquot 2002" /> Males and younger individuals of both sexes are sometimes affected.Asian and native American people have considerably higher risk.<ref name="Bouquot 2002" /> 
