 The Canadian Foundation for AIDS Research is a Canadian charitable foundation whose goal is to raise awareness of HIV/AIDS to increase funds for research. All of CANFAR’s fundraising efforts are geared towards raising money to fund Canadian HIV/AIDS research. CANFAR is the only privately funded, national charity dedicated solely to advancing research in the area of HIV and AIDS. __TOC__ CANFAR was created in 1985 by Dinah Koo, Van Beltreme, and Robert Mang. At the time, Canada’s emerging HIV/AIDS organizations primarily dealt with the care and support of people living with the disease, but little was being done to fund research. This inspired the three friends to establish an organization to raise money for Canadian HIV/AIDS research, and ultimately, a cure. Three doctors and scientists, Dr. Mary Fanning, Dr. Michael Baker and Dr. Norbert Gilmore were brought on board to scientifically determine which research projects were most promising and deserving of funding. CANFAR was incorporated in 1987, and Robert Ross became the charity’s founding Executive Director. Also 1987, CANFAR held the first Food for Thought gala dinner, raising over $150,000 for HIV/AIDS research. This event has grown and changed over the years, but is an integral part of CANFAR’s fundraising efforts. Prominent philanthropist Bluma Appel joined CANFAR’s Planning Committee, later becoming a creator of a Board of Advisors and a Junior Committee, as well as acting as Chair of the Executive Committee until her death in 2007. In 1989, the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) was organized to identify the most promising HIV/AIDS research projects and providing them funding. Dr. Gilmore headed up this group and in 1989, CANFAR announced the its first seventeen grant recipients. That year, CANFAR gave $184,445 to HIV/AIDS research projects across Canada. CANFAR continued to grow its funding capabilities with its Outreach to Industries campaign, securing the support of both the banking and insurance industries. The new support enabled CANFAR to grant its first Canadian Industry Research Award (CIRA) to Dr. Tak Mak in the amount of $100,000. With to the renewed support of major supporters, CANFAR awarded a second CIRA to Dr. Frank Plummer in 1994. CANFAR supports research in four main areas of study; basic science, epidemiology, clinical studies, and psycho-social studies. Grants are awarded in two categories; one-year grants up to $25,000 and under or two-year grants up to $80,000 per year. A peer-review process determines which studies are funded. Each proposal is reviewed and graded by at least three other scholars in the HIV/AIDS field. Proposals are judged on scientific merit; relevance of the research; the qualifications, experience and productivity of the researcher; the uniqueness of the project within the Canadian and global context; and the facilities available to undertake the proposed research. Once graded, the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) decides which studies deserve funding. The SAC uses the grades and comments of the reviewers along with their own knowledge of the studies to make their decisions. The proposals are then ranked with a cut off point beyond which the SAC does not recommend funding. From there the Board of Directors meets to approve the SAC selections as to which proposals will be funded based on the rankings by the SAC and the funds available. Since 1987 CANFAR has reviewed close to over 1000 proposals, funded well over three hundred studies across ten provinces, and directed over $15 million towards HIV/AIDS research. Within the HIV/AIDS funding landscape in Canada, there are currently only three organizations devoted to research and two of those are funded by the federal and provincial levels of government respectively. As well as CANFAR there is the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the Ontario HIV/AIDS Treatment Network (OHTN). Over the course of its history, CANFAR has worked towards increasing the amount and number of the grants that it supports. In its first year CANFAR awarded five grants totalling almost $60,000. CANFAR now consistently funds over twenty research studies worth approximately $1 million per year. Dr. Sadhna Joshi at the University of Toronto is working to discoverways to combat HIV through gene therapy. In her research, Dr.Joshi targets both the cells that are infected by HIV, and the virusitself. Dr. Joshi is experimenting with ways to prevent infection byremoving receptors that HIV uses to enter immune cells. She is alsotargeting genes in HIV to prevent replication after infection. Dr. Clifford Lingwood from The Hospital for Sick Children andDr. Donald Branch from Canadian Blood Services have identifieda new resistance factor in the battle against HIV. They discoveredthat immune cells from individuals who have a certain rare bloodtype called blood group antigen Pk, also have a drastically reducedsensitivity to HIV infection. This factor protects cells from infection,indicating that it may have therapeutic potential. Dr. Deborah Money’s research at the Children’s and Women’sHealth Centre of British Columbia has provided new insights toguide the safe use of antiretroviral therapy during pregnancy. Dr.Money studies the risks of toxicity and health outcomes in bothmothers and uninfected children following antiretroviral therapy. Dr. Frank Plummer from the University of Manitoba is studyinga small group of Nairobi prostitutes to discover the source oftheir natural resistance to HIV infection. He has discoveredthat HIV resistant women have higher levels of a protein calledelafin/trappin-2 that helps to confer immunity. Dr. Plummer wasnamed Canada’s Health Researcher of the Year in 2007 for hiswork on HIV/AIDS. Dr. Mark Wainberg, CANFAR funded researcher and Director of theMcGill University AIDS Centre, discovered a critical component inthe highly effective “AIDS cocktail”. This major breakthrough led toa dramatic fall in AIDS deaths and has improved the lives of peopleliving with HIV/AIDS since the mid-1990s. Dr. Wainberg continuesto make discoveries at the forefront of HIV/AIDS research with a focus on anti-viral drugs, understanding drug resistance, and genetherapy. For his seminal contributions in the field, Dr. Wainberg hasbeen made an Officer of the Order of Canada and a [[Legion of Honour| Chevalier deLegion d’Honneur]] - the highest honours of Canada and France. On September 29, 1988 CANFAR hosted the first Food for Thought, and over $150,000 was raised for CANFAR. In 1993, Food for Thought was renamed the World AIDS Day Gala and moved from the fall to coincide with World AIDS Day on December 1. The event had grown to include after-dinner reception at the Art Shoppe, the Toronto Design Exchange, and the Bata Shoe Museum among others. In 1997 CANFAR’s the event was renamed Bloor Street Entertains. Now, shops and boutiques in the Bloor-Yorkville area hosted intimate dinners. The annual event has raised close to $4 million since 1988. On November 28, 2007, Bloor Street Entertains, hosted by Salah Bachir and Belinda Stronach, celebrated its 11th anniversary and raised over $500,000. CANFAR has been honored with the coveted Canadian Event Industry’s award for Best Fundraising Event 2004, and nominated for the same award in 2005 and 2006. In 2007 and 2008 BizBash, Toronto’s Event Planning Magazine, listed Bloor Street Entertains as the top benefit event in Toronto. Currently, Bloor Street Entertains provides intimate dinners catered by Toronto’s top chefs at over 20 prominent stores and galleries in the Bloor-Yorkville area including [[Tiffany & Co.]], Liss Gallery, Chanel, Cartier and Holt Renfrew. Afterwards guests convene at “The Party”, which in recent years has been held at Royal Ontario Museum(ROM). In 1994, Patricia Olasker organized a CANFAR fundraising event for lawyers which featured breakfast and amateur bands. Officially named AIDSbeat in 1996, the event raised $20,000 for HIV/AIDS research. By the time Olasker became a member of CANFAR’s Board, AIDSbeat had becom a "must do" event in the Toronto legal-community. As of 2008, attendance exceeds 1200 people each year and raises over $200,000 for CANFAR and HIV/AIDS research. In 1993, Have a Heart for CANFAR was organized at Northern Secondary School in Toronto. Students sold candy-grams of cinnamon hearts with red ribbons to each other near Valentine’s Day. Approximately $560 was raised through this awareness initiative. Now called Heart-o-grams, these packages include gum, a red ribbon, HIV/AIDS awareness pamphlets, and optional condoms. In 2011, the Have a Heart campaign was run in over 1,600 schools across Canada with more than 1 million students participating. Each year CANFAR gives out The Heart Award which is presented annually to the high school that demonstrates outstanding dedication and community spirit while raising research funds and HIV/AIDS awareness among their peers. In 2006, CANFAR introduced the first annual Have a Heart Scholarship Program to recognize Have a Heart participants who have made a difference in raising awareness in their school community. Each year a $500 scholarship is awarded to a deserving student who has displayed outstanding leadership in running a successful Have a Heart campaign and demonstrated dedication to the fight against HIV/AIDS. CANFAR has partnered with the Ontario College of Art and Design (OCAD) to create the awareness posters that are displayed in the schools. Those posters then form the basis for the awareness materials that are sent to the schools the following year. CANFAR Clubs are groups of students across Canada that have joined forces on college and university campuses to raise awareness about the virus and to raise funds for research. Annually, these student leaders organize parties, hold informative focus groups, and panel discussions to address the issue of AIDS, both within their demographic and internationally. The first CANFAR Club was initiated at McGill University in 2003. At McGill, Catherine Pringle and a friend decided to throw a party to spread AIDS awareness on campus called Affair en Rouge, raising funds for CANFAR. The second CANFAR Club was born at Dalhousie University in 2004. In their first year, Dalhousie generated funds for CANFAR through small fundraising and awareness initiatives and a gala event. In 2005, following the example set by McGill and Dalhousie, three new CANFAR Clubs were formally established at the University of Toronto Mississauga, University of Guelph and The University of Western Ontario. Together, the schools raised a combined total of more than $15,000 for HIV/AIDS research in 2005 and held AIDS awareness symposiums on campus, with the goal of initiating a frank discussion about the AIDS pandemic among their peers. In 2008, nineteen campuses were actively engaged in raising funds and awareness about HIV/AIDS. The main role of the Board of Directors is to set the strategic direction of the organization, to hire and support the Executive Director and National Director of Development to provide financial, regulatory and reputational oversight. The Board also takes on a fundraising role by assisting the staff through events or programs, as well as providing advice according to each individual’s professional area of expertise. Influential members have included: Bluma Appel, Dr. Stanley Read, Dr. Mark Wainberg, and Andrew M. Pringle who served as President of the Board for twelve years before stepping down in 2007 to assume the role of Chairman. In 1999 Andy’s wife, Valerie Pringle, became CANFAR’s National Spokesperson. 
