 Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a glycoprotein involved in cell adhesion. It is normally produced during fetal development, but the production of CEA stops before birth. Therefore, it is not usually present in the blood of healthy adults, although levels are raised in heavy smokers. CEA is a glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-cell surface anchored glycoprotein whose specialized sialofucosylated glycoforms serve as functional colon carcinoma L-selectin and E-selectin ligands, which may be critical to the metastatic dissemination of colon carcinoma cells. CEA was first identified in 1965 by Phil Gold and Samuel O. Freedman in human colon cancer tissue extracts. It was found that serum from individuals with colorectal carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma, lung carcinoma and breast carcinoma, as well as individuals with medullary thyroid carcinoma, had higher levels of CEA than healthy individuals (above 2.5 ng/ml). CEA elevation is known to be affected by multiple factors. It varies inversely with tumor grade (well-differentiated tumors secrete more CEA). CEA is elevated more in tumors with lymph node and distant metastasis than in organ-confined tumors (varies directly with tumor stage). Left-sided tumors tend to have higher CEA levels than right-sided tumors. Tumors causing obstruction produce higher CEA levels. Aneuploid tumors produce more CEA than diploid tumors. Liver dysfunction increases CEA levels as the liver is the primary site of CEA metabolism. CEA levels are higher for smokers than for nonsmokers. Other nonneoplastic causes of elevated CEA include inflammatory bowel disease, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, biliary disease, liver dysfunction (as stated above) and hypothyroidism. Regions of high CEA levels in the body can be detected with the monoclonal antibody arcitumomab. CEA measurement is mainly used as a tumor marker to identify recurrences after surgical resection, or localize cancer spread through dosage of biological fluids. The CEA blood test is not reliable for diagnosing cancer or as a screening test for early detection of cancer. Most types of cancer do not produce a high CEA. Elevated CEA levels should return to normal after successful surgical resection, or within 6 weeks of starting treatment if cancer treatment is successful. CEA levels may also be raised in some non-neoplastic conditions like ulcerative colitis, pancreatitis, cirrhosis, COPD, Crohn's disease as well as in smokers. Antibodies to CEA are also commonly used in immunohistochemistry to identify cells expressing the glycoprotein in tissue samples. In adults, CEA is expressed only in cancer cells, especially adenocarcinomas, such as those arising in the colon, lung, breast, stomach, or pancreas. It can therefore be used to distinguish between these and other similar cancers. For example, it can help to distinguish between adenocarcinoma of the lung and mesothelioma, a different type of lung cancer which is not normally CEA positive. Because even monoclonal antibodies to CEA tend to have some degree of cross-reactivity, occasionally giving false positive results, it is commonly employed in combination with other immunohistochemistry tests, such as those for BerEp4, WT1, and calretinin. CEA and related genes make up the CEA family belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily. In humans, the carcinoembryonic antigen family consists of 29 genes, 18 of which are normally expressed. The following is a list of human genes which encode carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion proteins: CEACAM1,CEACAM3,CEACAM4,CEACAM5,CEACAM6,CEACAM7,CEACAM8,CEACAM16,CEACAM18,CEACAM19,CEACAM20,CEACAM21 
