 Penile cancer is a malignant growth found on the skin or in the tissues of the penis. Penile cancer is a rare cancer in developed nations. The annual incidence is approximately 1 in 100,000 men in the United States, 1 in 250,000 in Australia, and 0.82 per 100,000 in Denmark. In the United Kingdom, fewer than 500 men are diagnosed with penile cancer every year. In some South American countries, Africa, and Asia, this cancer type constitutes up to 10%. Cervical cancer also occurs more frequently in these geographic areas. The lifetime risk has been estimated as 1 in 1,437 in the United States and 1 in 1,694 in Denmark. Penile cancer accounts for up to 10% of cancers in men in some parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. Like many malignancies, penile cancer can spread to other parts of the body. It is usually a primary malignancy, the initial place from which a cancer spreads in the body. Much less often it is a secondary malignancy, one in which the cancer has spread to the penis from elsewhere. The staging of penile cancer is determined by the extent of tumor invasion, nodal metastasis, and distant metastasis. The AJCC staging guidelines are as follows: Prognosis can range considerably for patients, depending where on the scale they have been staged. Generally speaking, the earlier the cancer is diagnosed, the better the prognosis. The overall 5-year survival rate for all stages of penile cancer is about 50%. There are several treatment options for penile cancer, depending on staging. They include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biological therapy. The most common treatment is one of five types of surgery: Radiation therapy is usually used adjuvantly with surgery to reduce the risk of recurrence. With earlier stages of penile cancer, a combination of topical chemotherapy and less invasive surgery may be used. More advanced stages of penile cancer usually require a combination of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.In addition to all the above, treatment of the underlying disease like brucellosis, is important to limit disease recurrence. 
