 Cardiology (from Greek , kardiā, "heart"; and , -logia) is a medical specialty dealing with disorders of the heart (specifically the human heart). The field includes medical diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart defects, coronary artery disease, heart failure, valvular heart disease and electrophysiology. Physicians who specialize in this field of medicine are called cardiologists. Physicians who specialize in cardiac surgery are called cardiac surgeons. Cardiology is a specialty of internal medicine. To be a cardiologist in the United States, a three year residency in internal medicine is followed by a three year residency in cardiology. It is possible to specialize further in a subspecialty. Recognized subspecialties in the United States by the ACGME are: Recognized subspecialties in the United States by the American Osteopathic Association Bureau of Osteopathic Specialists (AOABOS) include: As the center focus of cardiology, the heart has numerous anatomical features (e.g., atria, ventricles, heart valves) and numerous physiological features (e.g., systole, heart sounds, afterload) that have been encyclopedically documented for many centuries. Disorders of the heart lead to heart disease and cardiovascular disease and they lead to a significant number of deaths: cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death and caused 29.34% of all deaths in 2002. The primary responsibility of the heart is to pump blood around the body.It pumps blood from the body — called the systemic circulation — through the lungs — called the pulmonary circulation — and then back out to the body.This means that the heart is connected to and affects the entirety of the body. Simplified, the heart is a circuit of the Circulation.While plenty is known about the healthy heart, the bulk of the study in cardiology is in the disorders of the heart and restoration, where possible, of function. The heart is a muscle that squeezes blood and functions like a pump.Each part of the heart is susceptible to failure or dysfunction and the heart could be divided into the mechanical and the electrical. The electrical part of the heart is centered on the periodic contraction (squeezing) of the muscle cells that is caused by the cardiac pacemaker located in the sinoatrial node.The study of the electrical aspects is a subfield of electrophysiology called cardiac electrophysiology and is epitomized with the electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG).The action potentials generated in the pacemaker propagate throughout the heart in a specific pattern and is the system that carries this potential is called the electrical conduction system.Dysfunction of the electrical system manifests in many ways and includes Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome, ventricular fibrillation, and heart block. The mechanical part of the heart is centered on the fluidic movement of blood and the functionality of the heart as a pump.The mechanical part is ultimately the purpose of the heart and many of the disorders of the heart disrupt the ability to move blood.Failure to move sufficient blood can result in failure in other organs and may result in death if severe.Heart failure is one condition in which the mechanical properties of the heart have failed or are failing, which means insufficient blood is being circulated. Cardiology is concerned with the normal functionality of the heart and the deviation from a healthy heart.Many disorders involve the heart itself but some are outside of the heart. Contrary to a basic understanding of the cardiovascular system, the heart cannot receive enough oxygen and nutrients from the blood it pumps and it must be supplied with blood as if it were any other organ in the body. Unlike the systemic organs the heart receives perfusion in the phase of diastole rather than systole. This circulation of blood is called the coronary circulation.The coronary circulation consists of coronary arteries and coronary veins. Disorders of the coronary circulation can have devastating effects to the heart since damage to the heart can reduce coronary circulation which causes further damage. Cardiac arrest refers to the cessation(to cease)of normal systemic circulation due to failure in proper contraction of the heart.There are several conditions that can cause cardiac arrest. Treatment of cardiac arrest includes cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and defibrillation depending on the exact cause of cardiac arrest. The pericardium is a double-walled sac — fibrous pericardium and serous pericardium — that contains the heart. The heart contains four valves that direct the flow of blood in a single direction.Failure to prevent reverse-flow is called regurgitation, or insufficiency.Narrowing of the valves obstructs flow and is called stenosis. Congenital heart defects are defects in the structure of the heart which are present at birth. Various cardiology diagnostic tests and procedures. 
