 Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (CPVT) is a rhythm disorder of the lower chambers of the heart, or ventricles that occurs in genetically predisposed individuals. Synonyms: Familial Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (FPVT), Catecholamine-Induced Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia. Thought to affect as many as one in ten thousand people, it is estimated to cause 15% of all unexplained sudden cardiac deaths in young people. First recognized in 1975, this condition, due to a mutation in a voltage gated ion channel which regulates the flow of ions in and out or cardiac cells and therefore their electrical stability may cause the heart to enter a life threatening state of arrhythmia as response to the natural release of catecholamines from nerve endings on the heart muscle and from the adrenal glands into the circulation. This rhythm disturbance prevent the heart from pumping blood appropriately. The most common symptom is dizziness or syncope occurring on exercise or due to emotional stress, symptoms which typically starts manifesting themselves during the first or second decade of life. Because its symptoms are most prevalent when the body is subjected to intense emotional or physical stress, the condition can elude traditional methods of heart examination such as echocardiogram and resting electrocardiogram. CPVT may cause exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias with ensuing dizziness and/or syncope occurring during physical activity or acute emotional stress. Affected patients though demonstrate no structural problems of the heart. Ventricular tachycardia may self-terminate or degenerate into ventricular fibrillation, causing sudden death without immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The majority of events occur during childhood and more than 60% of affected individuals will have a first episode of syncope or cardiac arrest by age 20. CPVT diagnosis is based on reproducing irregularly shaped ventricular arrhythmias during ECG exercise stress testing, syncope occurring during physical activity and acute emotion, and a history of exercise or emotion-related palpitations and dizziness with an absence of structural cardiac abnormalities. Type OMIM Gene Locus CPVT1 RYR2 1q42.1-q43 CPVT2 CASQ2 1p13.3-p11 Mutation of RYR2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.The inheritance of the Calsequestrin-2 mutation is autosomal recessive. Medications to treat CPVT include beta blockers and verapamil. According to recent research published in Nature Medicine, flecainide inhibits the release of the cardiac ryanodine receptor–mediated Ca<sup>2+</sup>, and is therefore believed to medicate the underlying molecular cause of CPVT in both mice and humans. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators are used to prevent sudden death. In recent reports, left cardiac sympathetic denervation and bilateral thoracoscopic sympathectomy have shown promising results in individuals whose symptoms cannot be controlled by beta blockers. 
