 Personal Life Charles A. Czeisler was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1952. In 1993, Dr. Czeisler married Theresa Lynn Shanahan M.D. He now has three children and lives in the Boston Area. In his free time, Dr. Czeisler enjoys swimming, playing tennis and slalom water sking. Background and Education Dr. Czeisler is a researcher and author in the fields of both circadian rhythms and sleep medicine. Dr. Czeisler graduated from Harvard College, magna cum laude in 1974, with a degree in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. He then went on to receive his Ph.D. in Neuro- and Bio-behavioral Sciences and his M.D. from Stanford University. Dr. Elliot Weitzman, who both worked with and mentored Czeisler, first influenced Czeisler to study sleep. Today, Dr. Czeisler is the Baldino Professor of Sleep Medicine and Director of the Division of Sleep Medicine at Harvard Medical School. Additionally, he works as the Division Chief of Sleep Medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts."Division of Sleep Medicine." Brigham and Women's Hospital. The Division of Sleep Medicine, 25 Jan. 2013. Web. 11 Apr. 2013.[2] Dr. Czeisler has spent over 30 years researching the relationship between human sleep and the physiology of the human circadian clock and teaching a course at Harvard College on Circadian Biology for undergraduate and graduate students. Research Interests Czeisler’s research focus is the neurobiology of human circadian rhythm. He examines the relationship between the circadian oscillator and sleep homeostasis, and how this interaction affects one’s health.“Annual Sleep in American Poll Exploring Connections with Communications Technology Use and Sleep”. National Sleep Foundation. March 7, 2011.[4]Joseph S. Takahashi, Hee-Kyung Hong, Caroline H. Ko & Erin L. McDearmon “The genetics of mammalian circadian order and disorder: implications for physiology and disease”. Nature Reviews Genetics 9, 764-775 (October 2008)[5] Czeisler's research interests encompass many areas including body temperature rhythms Czeisler CA, Weitzman Ed, Moore-Ede MC, Zimmerman JC, Knauer RS. "Human sleep: its duration and organization depend on its circadian phase." Science. 1980 Dec 12;210(4475):1264-7. [6] and the effects of melatonin on humans (2011). Münch M, Bromundt V. “Light and chronobiology: implications for health and disease”. Dialogues Clinical Neuroscience. 2012 Dec;14(4):448-53. Czeisler investigates how the physiological system works to reset the circadian pacemaker. His team discovered that light transduced by non-visual input (melanopsin activation) could reset the circadian clock in patients without sight. This indicated that some blind humans can [[entrainment (chronobiology)|entrain]] to light through non-visual photoreceptors (2007). Czeisler found that [[Photosensitive ganglion cell|intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs)]] influence both the circadian clock and visual perception, indicating that ipRGCs contribute to “visual” light perception even in the absence of rod and cone photoreceptors . Significantly, this challenged the misconception that rod and cone photoreceptors were the sole receptors for photo-entrainment in humans. In 2002, Czeisler published a study that defended the long held notion that mammals do not have extra-occular photoreceptors. The findings of his study definitively refute those of the famous 1998 Science publication, “Extraocular Circadian Phototransduction in Humans,” which found that bright light behind the knees can help regulated human circadian photoentrainment. 
