 Charles Joseph Sophy (born on October 2, 1960), best known as Dr. Charles Sophy, DO, is a Los Angeles based psychiatrist, and Medical Director for the County of Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services. He is the author of Side By Side The Revolutionary Mother-Daughter Program for Conflict-Free Communication, and has appeared on several nationwide television broadcasts, radio broadcasts and numerous print and on-line publications. Charles Sophy was born in Pottsville, Pennsylvania to parents Charles Joseph Sophy and Renee Marie Joseph. He has one brother, Matthew Charles Sophy. He is of Lebanese descent. Sophy attended high school at Nativity B.V.M. High School in Pottsville, PA and obtained his Bachelor of Science in Biological Sciences at Saint Joseph’s University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1982. He graduated from Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1986, and completed his internship and family practice residency at the Metropolitan Hospital/Springfield Hospital in Springfield, Pennsylvania. He completed his Adult Psychiatry residency at Norristown State Hospital in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania followed by a fellowship for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry at Hahnemann University Hospital in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Sophy is a licensed Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine and is board certified in Family Practice, Adult Psychiatry and Child/Adolescent Psychiatry. He serves as the Medical Director for the County of Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services. On November 6, 2008 Zimmer Children's Museum presented him the Discovery Award for Leadership, Vision and Commitment to the Community.He is a member of the following organizations: American Psychiatric Association, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, American College of Neuropsychiatry, American Osteopathic Association, American Medical Association, American College of Family Practitioners, and the California Osteopathic Medical Association. He recently published his first book, Side By Side The Revolutionary Mother-Daughter Program for Conflict-Free Communication, Harper Collins, 2010. He first appeared on national television for PBS in the show A Place of Our Own, and subsequently on other shows on several networks, including as Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew, Sober House, Today Show, Larry King Live, The Rachael Ray Show, Good Morning America, Anderson Cooper 360°, Headline News, Inside Edition, CBS Early Show, The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, and Flipping Out. He is the child mental health expert on Videojug, where he has addressed ADD and ADHD as well as other child mental health issues. Dr. Sophy has achieved some notoriety among tax practitioners for having brought suit in the United States Tax Court. In Sophy v. Commissioner, he and the co-owner of their two homes sued because the Internal Revenue Service had limited the amount of their deductible home mortgage interest expense. The suit establishes that unmarried co-owners are limited to the same amount of deduction that a married couple would be, by establishing that the maximum allowable deduction is determined per residence, not per tax return. Dr. Sophy has been featured on the television series, The Insider, where he psychoanalyzed Gary Coleman who had walked off the show after being accused of abusing his wife. Dr. Sophy, who had been invited on the show to share his expert opinion, said, "You're lucky he didn't hit someone here tonight," and "What I saw there needs medicine," comments which have been generally ridiculed as Coleman displayed no signs of violence during the interview. {{Persondata | NAME =Sophy, Charles | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = American psychiatrist| DATE OF BIRTH = 1960-10-02| PLACE OF BIRTH =Pottsville, Pennsylvania | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
