 The Children's Craniofacial Association (CCA) is a United States based nonprofit organization whose mission is to empower and give hope to individuals and families with facial anomalies. CCA is a family support organization recognized by governmental, educational and medical healthcare agencies across the US. Cher became CCA's National Spokesperson in 1990. In 1985, Cher starred in the movie Mask,a film about the life of Rocky Dennis, who had a rare craniofacial condition called Craniodiaphyseal Dysplasia. Cher attended an event in Washington, DC in September 1990, where families affected by craniofacial conditions testified before the House Budget Committee. During that week, she joined ten families on a visit to the White House hosted by then, First Lady, Barbara Bush. During her Love Hurts, Believe and Farewell Tours, Cher often invited children with craniofacial conditions back stage to visit. Families who are affected by facial differences feel alone and isolated. CCA puts families in contact with others having similar experiences for the purpose of reciprocal support. During a late night visit in Washington, DC with several craniofacial families Cher suggested an annual meeting be held where families could get together to share information and support. In 1991, Children's Craniofacial Association held its first Annual Cher's Family Retreat at Disney World in Florida. Since then subsequent retreats have been held each year in various cities across the United States. CCA had a financial assistance program that covers costs of food, travel and lodging for families who must travel to receive medical care. CCA publishes a quarterly newsletter containing articles written by craniofacial surgeons, healthcare providers, family members and others. A Guide To Understanding Apert Syndrome A Guide To Understanding Cleft Lip and Palate A Guide To Understanding CraniosynostosisA Guide To Understanding Crouzon SyndromeA Guide To Understanding Facial PalsyA Guide To Understanding Fibrous DysplasiaA Guide To Understanding Frontonasal DysplasiaA Guide To Understanding HemangiomasA Guide To Understanding Hemifacial MicrosomiaA Guide To Understanding MicrotiaA Guide To Understanding Moebius SyndromeA Guide To Understanding Pfeiffer SyndromeA Guide To Understanding Pierre Robin SequenceA Guide To Understanding Treacher Collins Syndrome Sleep ApneaWhat to Expect When Your Child Goes to SurgeryWhat to Bring to the HospitalParents: You are the Official Care Manager!Empowering Children to Cope with TeasingApert FeetA Parent's Journey to AcceptanceAnthropology and Craniofacial AnomaliesCleidocranial DysplasiaDramatically Increasing the Quality of Life with Prosthestic DevicesHydrocephalusTips on Dealing With An External Distraction DeviceFostering Tolerance: Ways Parents and Kids Can Stand Up to Bullying 
