 Artificial T cell receptors (also known as chimeric T cell receptors, chimeric immunoreceptors, chimeric antigen receptors (CARs)) are engineered receptors, which graft an arbitrary specificity onto an immune effector cell. Typically, these receptors are used to graft the specificity of a monoclonal antibody onto a T cell; with transfer of their coding sequence facilitated by retroviral vectors. In this way, a large number of cancer-specific T cells can be generated for adoptive cell transfer. Phase I clinical studies of this approach show efficacy. The most common form of these molecules are fusions of single-chain variable fragments (scFv) derived from monoclonal antibodies, fused to CD3-zeta transmembrane and endodomain. Such molecules result in the transmission of a zeta signal in response to recognition by the scFv of its target. An example of such a construct is 14g2a-Zeta, which is a fusion of a scFv derived from hybridoma 14g2a (which recognizes disialoganglioside GD2). When T cells express this molecule (usually achieved by oncoretroviral vector transduction), they recognize and kill target cells that express GD2 (e.g. neuroblastoma cells). To target malignant B cells, investigators have redirected the specificity of T cells using a chimeric immunoreceptor specific for the B-lineage molecule, CD19. The variable portions of an immunoglobulin heavy and light chain are fused by a flexible linker to form a scFv. This scFv is preceded by a signal peptide to direct the nascent protein to the endoplasmic reticulum and subsequent surface expression (this is cleaved). A flexible spacer allows to the scFv to orient in different directions to enable antigen binding. The transmembrane domain is a typical hydrophobic alpha helix usually derived from the original molecule of the signalling endodomain which protrudes into the cell and transmits the desired signal. The fact that these molecules actually work is at first glance surprising. At second glance one remembers that type I proteins are in fact two protein domains linked by a transmembrane alpha helix in between. The cell membrane lipid bilayer, through which the transmembrane domain passes, acts to isolate the inside portion (endodomain) from the external portion (ectodomain). It is not so surprising hence that attaching an ectodomain from one protein to an endodomain of another protein results in a molecule that combines the recognition of the former to the signal of the latter. A signal peptide directs the nascent protein into the endoplasmic reticulum. This is essential if the receptor is to be glycosylated and anchored in the cell membrane. Any eukaryotic signal peptide sequence usually works fine. Generally, the signal peptide natively attached to the amino-terminal most component is used (e.g. in a scFv with orientation light chain - linker - heavy chain, the native signal of the light-chain is used The antigen recognition domain is usually an scFv. There are however many alternatives. An antigen recognition domain from native T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha and beta single chains have been described, as have simple ectodomains (e.g. CD4 ectodomain to recognize HIV infected cells) and more exotic recognition components such as a linked cytokine (which leads to recognition of cells bearing the cytokine receptor). In fact almost anything that binds a given target with high affinity can be used as an antigen recognition region. A spacer region links the antigen binding domain to the transmembrane domain. It should be flexible enough to allow the antigen binding domain to orient in different directions to facilitate antigen recognition. The simplest form is the hinge region from IgG1. Alternatives include the CH<sub>2</sub>CH<sub>3</sub> region of immunoglobulin and portions of CD3. For most scFv based constructs, the IgG1 hinge suffices. However the best spacer often has to be determined empirically. The transmembrane domain is a hydrophobic alpha helix that spans the membrane. Generally, the transmembrane domain from the most membrane proximal component of the endodomain is used. Interestingly, using the CD3-zeta transmembrane domain may result in incorporation of the artificial TCR into the native TCR a factor that is dependent on the presence of the native CD3-zeta transmembrane charged aspartic acid residue. Different transmembrane domains result in different receptor stability. The CD28 transmembrane domain results in a brightly expressed, stable receptor. This is the "business-end" of the receptor. After antigen recognition, receptors cluster and a signal is transmitted to the cell. The most commonly used endodomain component is CD3-zeta which contains 3 ITAMs. This transmits an activation signal to the T cell after antigen is bound. CD3-zeta may not provide a fully competent activation signal and additional co-stimulatory signaling is needed. For example, chimeric CD28 and OX40 can be used with CD3-Zeta to transmit a proliferative / survival signal, or all three can be used together. First-generation” CARs typically had the intracellular domain from the CD3 ξ- chain, which is the primary transmitter of signals from endogenous TCRs. “Second-generation” CARs add intracellular signaling domains from various costimulatory protein receptors (e.g., CD28, 41BB, ICOS) to the cytoplasmic tail of the CAR to provide additional signals to the T cell. Preclinical studies have indicated that the second generation of CAR designs improves the antitumor activity of T cells. More recent,“third-generation” CARs combine multiple signaling domains, such as CD3z-CD28-41BB or CD3z-CD28-OX40, to further augment potency. This method is based on the reprogramming by the vector (for example viral), and chimeric antigen receptor, that redirects them against malignant cell and enables their destruction. There has been interest of sciences in the use of CAR-modified T cell as cancer immunotherapy. In the pre-clinical and clinical trial, there has been a focus upon optimizing in field of structural and signaling. The first generation of CAR-modified T cell showed success in pre-clinical trial and entered phase I clinical trials. Clinical trials included of ovarian cancer, neuroblastoma and various type of leukemia and lymphoma. The clinical trials showed little evidence of anti-tumor with insufficient activation, persistence and homing to cancer tissue. Some anti-tumor responses being reported in patient with B-lymphoma (treated with alfaCD20-CD3zeta CARs-modified T cell) and neuroblastoma (treated with ScFv-CD3zeta CARs-modified T cell) were reported partial response, stable diseases and remission. The second and the third generation CAR-modification T cells are capable of delivering enhancement of activation signal, proliferation, production of cytokines and effector function of CAR-modified T cell in pre-clinical trials. Both the second and the third generation CAR-modified T cell entering to the clinical trial now. The first clinical trial have shown some promising result. In study with alfaCD19.4-1BB.CD3zeta T cell in patient with chronic lymphocyte leukemia has been complete remission has been ongoing 10 month after treatment. The CAR-modified T cell were found to expand 3-logs in this patient(s), that infiltrated and lysed cancer tissue. Interestingly, a fraction of these cell displayed a memory phenotype of T cell for preventiv tumor relapses. Although, these CAR-modified T cell produced significant therapeutic effect, their activity lead to life-threatening tumorlysis 3 weeks after the first infusion CAR-modified T cell. Recently adverse events were reported which highlight the need for caution while using second and third generation of CAR-modified T cells. One patient died 5 days after cyclophosphamide chemotherapy, followed by infusion of CAR-modified T cells. The toxicity lead to a clinically signifiant release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, pulmonary toxicity, multi-organ failure and eventual death of the patient. The next problem is off target cytotoxicity, that leads to autoimmune reactions, because most of tumor-associated antigens are expressed on normal tissue cells. The great promise of cancer immunotherapy is the cure of tumor without the toxicity of conventional treatments. The pre-clinical and clinical trial of CAR-modified T cells have given hope in cancer therapy. The treatment of cancer with modified T cells has several advantages: HLA-independent recognition of antigen, broad applicability for many patients and the rapid delivery of CAR-modified T cells. The successful application of cell will require the identification of target antigen, that are expressed only on tumor cells, thereby minimizing the risk of toxicity, Actual list of tumors antigens and CARs in in vitro and in vivo trials,: Target antigen !! Associated malignanci !! Receptor type !! CARs generation α-Folate receptor Ovarian cancer ScFv-FcεRIγCAIX CAIX Renal cell carcinoma ScFv-FcεRIγ CAIX Renal cell carcinoma ScFv-FcεRIγ CD19 B-cell malignancies ScFv-CD3ζ (EBV) CD19 B-cell malignancies, CLL ScFv-CD3ζ CD19 B-ALL ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 ALL CD3ζ(EBV) CD19 ALL post-HSCT ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 Leukemia, lymphoma, CLL ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ vs. CD3ζ CD19 B-cell malignancies ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 B-cell maligniancies post-HSCT ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 Refractory Follicular Lymphoma ScFv-CD3ζ CD19 B-NHL ScFv -CD3ζ CD19 B-lineage lymphoid malignancies post-UCBT ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 CLL, B-NHL ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 B-cell malignancies, CLL, B-NHL ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD19 ALL, lymphoma ScFv-41BB-CD3ζ vs CD3ζ CD19 ALL ScFv-41BB-CD3ζ CD19 B-cell malignancies ScFv-CD3ζ (Influenza MP-1) CD19 B-cell malignancies ScFv-CD3ζ (VZV) CD20 Lymphomas ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD20 B-cell malignancies ScFv-CD4-CD3ζ CD20 B-cell lymphomas ScFv-CD3ζ CD20 Mantle cell lymphoma ScFv-CD3ζ CD20 Mantle cell lymphoma, indolent B-NHL CD3 ζ /CD137/CD28 || Third CD20 indolent B cell lymphomas ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD20 Indolent B cell lymphomas ScFv-CD28-41BB-CD3ζ CD22 B-cell malignancies ScFV-CD4-CD3ζ CD30 Lymphomas ScFv-FcεRIγ CD30 Hodgkin lymphoma ScFv-CD3ζ (EBV) CD33 AML ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CD33 AML ScFv-41BB-CD3ζ CD44v7/8 || Cervical carcinoma || ScFv-CD8-CD3ζ || Second CEA Breast cancer ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CEA Colorectal cancer ScFv-CD3ζ CEA Colorectal cancer ScFv-FceRIγ CEA Colorectal cancer ScFv-CD3ζ CEA Colorectal cancer ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ CEA Colorectal cancer ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ EGP-2 Multiple malignancies scFv-CD3ζ EGP-2 Multiple malignancies scFv-FcεRIγ EGP-40 Colorectal cancer scFv-FcεRIγ erb-B2 Colorectal cancer CD28/4-1BB-CD3ζ || Third erb-B2 Breast and others ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ erb-B2 Breast and others ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ (Influenza) erb-B2 Breast and others ScFv-CD28mut-CD3ζ erb-B2 Prostate cancer ScFv-FcεRIγ erb-B 2,3,4 Breast and others Heregulin-CD3ζ erb-B 2,3,4 Breast and others ScFv-CD3ζ FBP Ovarian cancer ScFv-FcεRIγ FBP Ovarian cancer ScFv-FcεRIγ (alloantigen) Fetal acethylcholine receptor Rhabdomyosarcoma ScFv-CD3ζ GD2 Neuroblastoma ScFv-CD28 GD2 Neuroblastoma ScFv-CD3ζ GD2 Neuroblastoma ScFv-CD3ζ GD2 Neuroblastoma ScFv-CD28-OX40-CD3ζ GD2 Neuroblastoma ScFv-CD3ζ (VZV) GD3 Melanoma ScFv-CD3ξ GD3 Melanoma ScFv-CD3ξ Her2/neu || Medulloblastoma || ScFv-CD3ξ || First Her2/neu || Lung malignancy || ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ || Second Her2/neu || Advanced osteosarcoma || ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ || Second Her2/neu || Glioblastoma || ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ || Second IL-13R-a2 Glioma IL-13-CD28-4-1BB-CD3ζ IL-13R-a2 Glioblastoma IL-13-CD3ζ IL-13R-a2 Medulloblastoma IL-13-CD3ζ KDR Tumor neovasculature ScFv-FcεRIγ k-light chain B-cell malignancies ScFv-CD3ζ k-light chain (B-NHL, CLL) ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ vs CD3ζ LeY Carcinomas ScFv-FcεRIγ LeY Epithelial derived tumors ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ L1 cell adhesion molecule Neuroblastoma ScFv-CD3ζ MAGE-A1 Melanoma ScFV-CD4-FcεRIγ MAGE-A1 Melanoma ScFV-CD28-FcεRIγ Murine CMV infected cells Murine CMV Ly49H-CD3ζ MUC1 Breast, Ovary ScFV-CD28-OX40-CD3ζ NKG2D ligands Various tumors NKG2D-CD3ζ Oncofetal antigen (h5T4) Various tumors ScFV-CD3ζ (vaccination) PSCA Prostate carcinoma ScFv-b2c-CD3ζ PSMA Prostate/tumor vasculature || ScFv-CD3ζ || First PSMA Prostate/tumor vasculature || ScFv-CD28-CD3ζ || Second PSMA Prostate/tumor vasculature || ScFv-CD3ζ || First TAA targeted by mAb IgE Various tumors FceRI-CD28-CD3ζ (+ a-TAA IgE mAb) TAG-72 Adenocarcinomas scFv-CD3ζ VEGF-R2 Tumor neovasculature scFv-CD3ζ Adoptive transfer of T cells expressing chimeric antigen receptors is a promising anti-cancer therapeutic as CAR-modified T cells can be engineered to target virtually any tumor associated antigen. There is great potential for this approach to improve patient-specific cancer therapy in a profound way. Following the collection of a patient's T cells, the cells are genetically engineered to express CARs specifically directed towards antigens on the patient's tumor cells, then infused back into the patient. Although adoptive transfer of CAR-modified T-cells is a unique and promising cancer therapeutic, there are significant safety concerns. Clinical trials of this therapy have revealed potential toxic effects of these CARs when healthy tissues express the same target antigens as the tumor cells, leading to outcomes similar to graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). A potential solution to this problem is engineering a suicide gene into the modified T cells. In this way, administration of a prodrug designed to activate the suicide gene during GVHD triggers apoptosis in the suicide gene-activated CAR T cells. This method has been used safely and effectively in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Adoption of suicide gene therapy to the clinical application of CAR-modified T cell adoptive cell transfer has potential to alleviate GVHD while improving overall anti-tumor efficacy. 
