 Chronic liver disease in the clinical context is a disease process of the liver that involves a process of progressive destruction and regeneration of the liver parenchyma leading to fibrosis and cirrhosis. The list of conditions associated with chronic liver disease is extensive and can be categorised in the following way: Viral causes Toxic and drugs Metabolic Autoimmune Other Signs of Chronic Liver Disease can be divided into those that are associated with the diagnosis of chronic liver disease, associated with decompensation and associated with the aetiology. It may be noted here that the Chronic Liver Disease takes several years to develop. Testing for chronic liver disease involves blood tests, x rays and a biopsy of the liver. The liver biopsy is a simple procedure done with a fine thin needle under local anesthesia. The tissue sample is sent to a laboratory where it is examined underneath a microscope Note that other diseases can involve the liver and even cause hepatomegaly but would not be considered part of the spectrum of chronic liver disease. Some examples of this would include chronic cancers with liver metastases, infiltrative haematological disorders such as chronic lymphoproliferative conditions, chronic myeloid leukaemias, myelofibrosis and metabolic abnormalities such as Gaucher's and Glycogen Storage Diseases. The treatment of chronic liver disease depends on the cause. While some conditions may be treated with medications, others may require surgery or a transplant. Transplant is required when the liver fails and there is no other alternative. Because many chronic liver disorders have no cure, many people have been turning to alternative health care. Herbal supplements are widely used by many people with chronic liver disease . None of these herbs have ever been tested in randomized clinical trials and no one knows whether they work. So if you decide to use herbs for your chronic liver disease, read about the herb, know your disorder and talk to your physician. Some common herbs known to be potentially harmful in liver disease include black cohosh, ma huang, chaparral, comfrey, germander, greater celandine, kava, mistletoe, pennyroyal, skull cap and valerian. With liver disease, you only get one chance at life and that balance can easily be overturned by a toxic herb. Some chronic liver diseases cannot be prevented but one can reduce the risk by adopting the following measures: 
