 Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) of 1988 are United States federal regulatory standards that apply to all clinical laboratory testing performed on humans in the United States, except clinical trials and basic research. In accord with the CLIA, the CLIA Program sets standards and issues certificates for clinical laboratory testing. CLIA defines a clinical laboratory as any facility which performs laboratory testing on specimens derived from humans for the purpose of providing information (1) for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease or impairment, and (2) for the assessment of health. An objective of the CLIA is to ensure the accuracy, reliability and timeliness of test results regardless of where the test was performed. Per CLIA, each specific laboratory system, assay, examination is graded for level of complexity by assigning scores of 1,2,3 for each of the following seven criteria. A score 1 is the lowest level of complexity and a score 3 indicates the highest level. Score 2 is assigned when the characteristics for a particular test are intermediate between the descriptions listed for scores of 1 and 3. Criteria for categorization:(1) Knowledge(2) Training and experience(3) Reagents and materials preparation(4) Characteristics of operational steps(5) Calibration, quality control, and proficiency testing materials(6) Test system troubleshooting and equipment maintenance(7) Interpretation and judgment Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has the primary responsibility for the operation of the CLIA Program. Within CMS, the program is implemented by the Center for Medicaid and State Operations, Survey and Certification Group, Division of Laboratory Services. The CLIA Program is funded by user fees collected from approximately 200,000 laboratories, most located in the United States. Under CLIA, tests and test systems that meet risk, error and complexity requirements are issued a CLIA certificate of waiver. In November 2007, The CLIA waiver provisions were revised by Congress to make it clear that tests approved by the FDA for home use automatically qualify for CLIA waiver 
