 A communication disorder is a speech and language disorder which refers to problems in communication and in related areas such as oral motor function. The delays and disorders can range from simple sound substitution to the inability to understand or use their native language. Disorders and tendencies included and excluded under the category of communication disorders may vary by source. For example the definitions offered by the American Speech-language-Hearing Association differ from that of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual 4th edition (DSM-IV). Gleanson (2001) defines a communication disorder as a speech and language disorder which refers to problems in communication and in related areas such as oral motor function. The delays and disorders can range from simple sound substitution to the inability to understand or use their native language.In general communications disorders commonly refer to problems in speech (comprehension and/or expression) that significantly interfere with an individual’s achievement and/or quality of life. One may find it important to know the operational definition of the agency performing an assessment or giving a diagnosis. Persons who speak more than one language or are considered to have an accent in their location of residence do not have speech disorders if they are speaking in a manner consistent with their home environment or a blending of their home and foreign environment. Communication disorders are usually first diagnosed in childhood or adolescence though they are not limited as childhood disorders and may persist into adulthood (DSM IV-TR, Rapoport DSM-IV Training Guide for Diagnosis of Childhood Disorders). They may also occur with other disorders (co-occurring disorders). Diagnosis involves testing and evaluation during which it is determined if the scores/performance are “substantially below” developmental expectations and if they “significantly” interfere with academic achievement, social interactions and daily living. This assessment may also determine if the characteristic is deviant or delayed. Therefore, it may be possible for an individual to have communication challenges but not meet the criteria of being “substantially below” criteria of the DSM (DSM IV-TR). It should also be noted that the DSM categories do not comprise a complete list of all communication disorders, for example, Auditory Processing Disorders (APD) are not classified under the DSM or ICD-10 The DSM-V proposed categories for Communication Disorders completely rework the ones stated above. It appears that the framers are making the categories more general in a way to capture the various aspects of communications disorders in a way that emphasizes their childhood onset and differentiate these communications disorders from those associated with other disorders (i.e. Autism Spectrum Disorders) The new categories are as follows. A complete view of the revisions and the rationale for each may be found at dsm5.org The following partial definitions are taken directly from this source. Examples of disorders that may include or create challenges in language and communication and/or may co-occur with the above disorders: Aphasia is loss of the ability to produce or comprehend language. There are Acute Aphasias which result from stroke or brain injury, and Primary Progressive Aphasias caused by progressive illnesses such as dementia. 
