 Complications of pregnancy are the symptoms and problems that are associated with pregnancy. There are both routine problems and serious, even potentially fatal problems. The routine problems are normal complications, and pose no significant danger to either the woman or the fetus. Serious problems can cause both maternal death and fetal death if untreated. A woman experiencing sudden defecation should report this to her practitioner. During pregnancy, many women experience a separation of their stomach muscles, known as diastasis recti. In order to understand this condition, it is important to understand the muscle that it affects. This particular condition affects the rectus abdominis muscle, that muscle that gives you a “six pack”. (See figure) The rectus abdominis muscle is divided down the middle by the tendinous line called the linea alba. It is kept in line by your transverse abdominal and your oblique abdominal muscles. During pregnancy, the growth of the fetus exerts pressure on abdominal cavity muscles, in particular the rectus abdominis. In pregnancies that experience rapid fetus growth or women with particularly weak abdominal muscles, this pressure can sometimes causes the rectus abdominis muscle to separate along the linea alba, creating a split between the left and right sides of the rectus abdominis. About one-third of all pregnant women experience diastasis recti at some point in their pregnancy, however it is much more likely to occur during the second trimester or third trimester of pregnancy. However, separation also frequently occurs during labor and delivery, or with women carrying more than one baby. Many cases of diastasis recti correct themselves after birth, but some do not. In cases where it persists, exercise may help improve the condition, and sometimes surgery is needed to correct the problem to prevent pain and future complications. The following problems originate mainly in the mother. Potential severe hypertensive states of pregnancy are mainly: Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) has an incidence of 0.5 to 7 per 1,000 pregnancies, and is the second most common cause of maternal death in developed countries after bleeding. WHO levels of haemoglobin are lower in the three timesters. According to the United Nations (UN) estimates, approximately half of pregnant women suffer from anaemia worldwide. Anemia prevalences during pregnancy differed from 18% in developed countries to 75% in South Asia.Treatment varies due to the severity of the anaemia, and can be used by increasing iron containing foods, oral iron tablets or by the use of parenteral iron. The following problems occur in the fetus or placenta, but may have serious consequences on the mother as well. Main Article: Multiple Birth Risks Multiples may become monochorionic, sharing the same chorion, with resultant risk of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Monochorionic multiples may even become monoamniotic, sharing the same amniotic sac, resulting in risk of umbilical cord compression and entanglement. In very rare cases, there may be conjoined twins, possibly impairing function of internal organs. 
