 Concussions, a type of traumatic brain injury, have been a notorious issue in sports, being a notable reason for player suicides and retirements due to chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) from their playing careers. A form of CTE common in boxing is dementia pugilistica (DP). Over 1.6 million Americans have sustained concussion-related injuries, a number that has since then grown in high school and college athletes. Because of the fact that concussions cannot be seen on X-rays nor CT scans, attempts to prevent concussions have been difficult. As of 2012, the four major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada have concussion policies. Major League Baseball's policy was first started in 2007, and injured players are examined by a team athletic trainer on the field. On March 29, 2011, MLB and the Major League Baseball Players Association announced that they have created various protocols for the league's concussion policy. The new policy includes four primary components: The National Basketball Association does not have a policy, and team procedures after concussions vary by team. The National Football League's policy was first started in 2007, and injured players are examined on field by the medical team. The league's policy included the "NFL Sidelines Concussion Exam", which requires players who have taken hits to the head to perform tests concerning concentration, thinking and balance. In 2011, the league introduced an assessment test, which combines a symptoms checklist, a limited neurological examination, a cognitive evaluation, and a balance assessment. For a player to be allowed to return, he must be asymptomatic. The National Hockey League's concussion policy began in 1997, and players who sustain concussions are evaluated by a team doctor in a quiet room. In March of 2011, the NHL adopted guidelines for the league's concussion policy. Before the adoptions, examinations on the bench for concussions was the minimum requirement, but the new guidelines make it mandatory for players showing concussion-like symptoms to be examined by a doctor in the locker room. League Year policy first implemented Year baseline testing occurred Year current policy took effect First step after injury Person who allows/denies player to return Person who determines player return NFL Evaluation by medical team Medical staff Medical staff/Consultant MLB 2007 2011 2007 Evaluation by an Athletic trainer using National Association Guidelines Medical staff Head physician/Medical director NBA No policy No policy No policy Varies by team Varies by team Varies by team NHL 1997 1997 2011 Neuropsychological evaluation by team doctor off rink Team doctor Team doctor MLS 2011 2003 2011 Evaluation by medical team Team physician Team physician/Neuropsychologist NASCAR 2003 2003 2003 Ambulance to infield care center NASCAR NASCAR Association football—while not as severe as American football—has also been one of the major sports to have concussions. Even though 50-80% of injuries in football are to the legs, head injuries have been shown to account for between 4 and 22% of football injuries, with a possibility that heading the ball could damage the head, as the ball could travel at 100 km/hour. However, most professional football players reported that they experienced head injuries from colliding with other players and the ground. A Norwegian study consisting of current and former players of the Norway national football team found out that 3% of the active and 30% of the former players had persistent symptoms of concussions, and that 35% of the active and 32% of that former players had abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG). American football has been known to have the most concussions out of any other sport in the United States, with over 250,000 injuries reported annually in football players, with 20% of high-school football players experiencing a concussion every year. In 2000, researchers from the Sports Medicine Research Laboratory at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill analyzed 17,549 players from 242 different school. Research eventually revealed that 888 (5.1%) of the players analyzed have at least one concussion a season, and 131 (14.7%) of them have had another concussion the year later. Division III and high-school players have a higher tendecy to sustain a concussion than Division II and Division I players. In , the National Football League Players Association partnered with the UNC to determine whether professional football players suffer any health effects after any injuries, with the findings being criticized by the NFL for being unreliable due to being based on self-reporting by the players. The death of Dale Earnhardt at the 2001 Daytona 500, along with Kenny Irwin, Adam Petty and Tony Roper, and serious injuries sustained by Steve Park in a wreck in September 2001 at Darlington, led to NASCAR creating various protocols to aid in driver safety, such as the introduction of the Car of Tomorrow. Drivers were eventually instructed to wear head and neck restraints, and SAFER barriers have been installed on racetrack walls, with foam-padded supports on each side of the helmet that would allow a driver's head to move in the event of a crash. Despite this, 29 concussions have been identified since 2004, and 12 of them have happened since 2007. In 2012, when Dale Earnhardt, Jr. suffered a concussion after being involved in a crash at Talladega in October, NASCAR expressed consideration in adding baseline testing to its concussion policies. NASCAR is one of few motorsport organizations that do not have baseline testing. In the 2005 high school basketball year, 3.6% of reported injuries were concussions, with 30.5% of activity report when a concussion occurred being rebounds. Despite boxing's violent nature, a National Safety Council report in 1996 ranked amateur boxing as the safest contact sport in America. However, concussions are one the most serious injuries that can occur from boxing, and in an 80-year span from 1918 to 1998, there were 659 boxers who died from brain injury. Ice hockey has also been known to have concussions inflict various players. Because of this, the NHL made hockey helmets mandatory in the 1979–80 NHL season. According to a data release by the National Academy of Neuropsychology's Sports Concussion Symposium, from 2006 to 2011, 759 NHL players have been diagnosed with a concussion. At the Mayo Clinic Sports Medicine Center Ice Hockey Summit: Action on Concussion conference in 2010, a panel made a recommendation that blows to the head are to be prohibited, and to outlaw body checking by 11- and 12-year olds. For the 2010–11 NHL season, the NHL prohibited blindside hits to the head, but did not ban hits to the face. The conference also urged the NHL and its minor entities to join the International Ice Hockey Federation, the NCAA and the Ontario Hockey League in banning any contact to the head. Concussions are also a significant factor in rugby union, another full-contact sport. The sport's world governing body, the International Rugby Board, has issued a highly detailed policy for dealing with injured players with suspected concussions. Under no circumstances is a player suffering from a suspected concussion allowed to return to play in that game. Players are not cleared to play after the injury for a minimum of 21 days, unless they are being supervised in their recovery by a medical practitioner. Even when medical advice is present, players must complete a multi-step monitoring process before being cleared to play again; this process requires a minimum of six days. Various reports have stated that female athletes sustain more concussions than their male counterparts. A December 2008 report states that 29,167 female high school soccer players suffered from concussions in 2005, compared to 20,929 male players. In high school basketball, 12,923 girls suffered from concussions while only 3,823 boys did. Girls also sustained more concussions in softball, compared to boys in baseball. Female athletes also had longer recovery times than males, and also had lower scores on visual memory tests. One of the possibles reasons that are suggested by various researchers as to why girls have longer recovery times include the possibility that the greater rate of blood flow in the brain for females might have affected the recovery times. Women's ice hockey was reported as one of the most dangerous sports in the NCAA, as the concussion rate is 2.72 per 1,000 player hours. Even though men's ice hockey allows body checking, which is illegal in the women's game, the rate of concussions for men is 46% lower, at 1.47 per 1,000 player hours.Women’s basketball is one of the top women’s sports with the highest risks of getting a concussion. With high competition comes a higher risk of injuries. College level sports can be very physical, especially women’s basketball (The Epidemiology). Concussions are associated with different activities. For women, they have a greater risk of getting a concussion by dribbling/ball handling rather than defending. Also it was found that female college basketball players typically receive concussions during games rather than practices. The reasoning for this could be that they are competing at a higher level, and are more aggressive in games than practices. Not only just in concussions, but for overall injuries (The Epidemiology)."The Epidemiology of Sport-Related Concussion." Clin Sports Med, 1 Jan. 2012. Web. 8 Feb. 2013. College football also has lower concussion rates than women's hockey, with a rate of 2.34 per 1,000. There have been several attempts at preventing concussions, such as the establishment of the PACE (Protecting Athletes Through Concussion Education) Program, which works with the imPACT system, which is currently used by every NFL and some NHL teams. In 2008, the Arena Football League tested a device created by Schutt Sports called the "Shockometer", which is a triangular device attached to the back of football helmets that has a light on the device that turns red when a concussion occurs. Riddell has also created the Head Impact Telemetry System (HITS) and Sideline Response System (SRS) to record the frequency and severity of player hits during practices and games. On every helmet with the system, MX Encoders are implemented, which can automatically record every hit. Eight NFL teams had originally planned to use the system in the season, but the NFL Players Association ultimately blocked its use. In 2012, film producer Steve James created the documentary film Head Games, interviewing former NHL player Keith Primeau, and the parents of Owen Thomas, who hung himself after sustaining brain damage during his football career at Penn. The documentary also interviewed former athletes Christopher Nowinski, Cindy Parlow, and New York Times reporter Alan Schwarz. 
