 Congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP), also known as congenital analgesia, is one or more rare conditions where a person cannot feel (and has never felt) physical pain. The conditions described here are separate from the HSAN group of disorders, which have more specific signs and etiology. For patients with this disorder, cognition and sensation are otherwise normal; for instance patients can still feel discriminative touch (though not always temperature), and there are no detectable physical abnormalities. Children with this condition often suffer oral cavity damage both in and around the oral cavity (such as having bitten off the tip of their tongue) or fractures to bones. Unnoticed infections and corneal damage due to foreign objects in the eye are also seen. Because the child cannot feel pain they may not respond to problems, thus being at a higher risk of more severe diseases. There are some cases where the condition is caused by increased production of endorphins in the brain, in which case naloxone may be used as treatment. This treatment does not always work.In some cases, this disorder can be in the voltage-gated sodium channel SCN9A (Na<sub>V</sub>1.7). Patients with such mutations are congenitally insensitive to pain and lack other neuropathies. There are three mutations in SCN9A: W897X, located in the P-loop of domain 2; I767X, located in the S2 segment of domain 2; and S459X, located in the linker region between domains 1 and 2. This results in a truncated non-functional protein. Na<sub>V</sub>1.7 channels are expressed at high levels in nociceptive neurons of the dorsal root ganglia. As these channels are likely involved in the formation and propagation of action potentials in such neurons, it is expected that a loss of function mutation in SCN9A will lead to abolished nociceptive pain propagation. There are generally two types of non-response exhibited. It is found in Vittangi, a village in Kiruna Municipality in northern Sweden, where nearly 40 cases have been reported. In Stieg Larsson's Millennium series, former boxer Paolo Roberto discovers that Ronald Niedermann was born with congenital analgesia and is therefore, as he describes "invulnerable" physically. ("He just keeps on going!") Even so, Roberto continues that his inability to perceive pain is a severe danger because Niedermann has no way of understanding when his body is being put in mortal danger by way of punches, blows, burns, or even gunshots. It is suggested that human awareness of painful stimuli is an evolutionary necessity to avoid injury and death. The Grey's Anatomy episode "Sometimes a Fantasy" features a young girl named Megan Clover that suffers from congenital analgesia believing herself to be a superhero. The movie Bereavement features a boy named Martin Bristol who suffers congenital analgesia who is kidnapped by a crazed man and taught the ways of murder. The episode of House M.D. entitled "Insensitive" also features a young girl named Hannah Morganthal who suffers from congenital analgesia, making her sickness extremely difficult to diagnose. One episode of N.C.I.S. featured a torturer who was "unable to feel pain himself" played by William Morgan Sheppard. In the 2011 slasher film Wrong Turn 4: Bloody Beginnings, the characters Three Finger, One Eye and Saw Tooth are said to have the disorder by the head of the sanatorium they are in the portion of the film set in 1974, with it being theorized that the condition was the result of inbreeding. Due to their inability to properly register pain, the three were depicted as being prone to self-harm in their youth, mutilating, severing and eating some of their own body parts. The disorder is also referenced throughout the series, especially the first film, Wrong Turn. The opening credits depict a medical journal talking about "resistance to pain" among other birth defects, and the entire series show the antagonists ignoring non-crippling injuries. In the play "Almost, Maine" by John Cariani, the vignette "This Hurts" is about a man with Congenital Analgesia, or "Hereditary Sensory Neuropathy Type 4", who is clocked in the head with an ironing board, and in the end feels the pain of love. In the mystery novel "The Freak Show Case" by Brian D. Eyre and Lezlie K. King, the detective's client and prime suspect has Congenital Analgesia and believes he cannot feel pain. He learns quickly that not all pain is physical, and that emotional pain can be extremely real and extremely motivating. The video game Dark Sector's protagonist, as shown in previews has this disease, and as such while others infected went mad from the pain, he remains sane and rational. In an episode of Grimm titled "Game Ogre" (season 1, episode 8), an escaped murderer is believed to have this condition, but in reality, he is an ogre , whose race naturally don't feel pain. Episode 31 of series 14 of Holby City sees fictional doctor Elliot Hope perform an operation on a patient with this disease. In the fourth season episode of The X-Files titled "Home" the members of the Peacock family all exhibit insensitivity to pain, it is implied this is due to generations of inbreeding. 
