 Craniosacral therapy (CST), or cranial-sacral therapy, is an alternative therapy used by occupational therapists, physiotherapists, massage therapists, naturopaths, and chiropractors. Craniosacral therapy was developed by Dr. John Upledger around 1983, and is loosely based on osteopathy in the cranial field (OCF), which was developed in 1899 by William Garner Sutherland. In the United States, OCF, or cranial osteopathy, as it is more commonly known, can only be practiced by fully licensed physicians (DOs, MDs and, in some states licensed naturopathic physicians, or NDs) and dentists. Cranial osteopathy is considered an extension of osteopathic medicine, and its training is therefore strictly regulated by the osteopathic medical profession and its governing bodies. The settled scientific consensus is that craniosacral therapy is pseudoscience, Cranial Osteopathy was originated by osteopath William Sutherland (1873–1954) in 1898–1900. While looking at a disarticulated skull, Sutherland was struck by the idea that the cranial sutures of the temporal bones where they meet the parietal bones were "beveled, like the gills of a fish, indicating articular mobility for a respiratory mechanism. From 1975 to 1983, osteopathic physician John E. Upledger and neurophysiologist and histologist Ernest W. Retzlaff worked at Michigan State University as clinical researchers and professors. They assembled a research team to investigate the purported pulse and further study Sutherland's theory of cranial bone movement. Upledger and Retzlaff went on to publish their results, which they interpreted as support for both the concept of cranial bone movement, and the concept of a cranial rhythm. Later reviews of these studies have concluded that their research is of insufficient quality to provide conclusive proof for the effectiveness of craniosacral therapy and the existence of cranial bone movement. Practitioners of craniosacral therapy assert that there are small, rhythmic motions of the cranial bones attributed to cerebrospinal fluid pressure or arterial pressure. The premise of CST is that palpation of the cranium can be used to detect this rhythmic movement of the cranial bones and selective pressures may be used to manipulate the cranial bones to achieve a therapeutic result. However, the degree of mobility and compliance of the cranial bones is considered controversial and is a critically important concept in craniosacral therapy. The therapist lightly palpates the patient's body, and focuses intently on the communicated movements. A practitioner's feeling of being in tune with a patient is described as entrainment.Patients often report feelings of deep relaxation during and after the treatment session, and may feel light-headed. This is popularly associated with increases in endorphins, but research shows the effects may actually be brought about by the endocannabinoid system. There are few reports of adverse events from CST treatment. In one study of craniosacral manipulation in patients with traumatic brain syndrome, the incidence of adverse effects from treatment was 5%. The Primary Respiratory Mechanism (PRM) has been summarized in five ideas. In October 2012 a systematic review of all the randomised clinical trials of Craniosacral therapy concluded that "the notion that CST is associated with more than non-specific effects is not based on evidence from rigorous randomised clinical trials". Commenting specifically on this conclusion the reviewer, Edzard Ernst, explained on his blog that the wording was "a polite and scientific way of saying that CST is bogus." Ernst also commented that the quality of five of the six trials he had reviewed was "deplorably poor," a sentiment prefigured by an earlier (August 2012) review which noted the "moderate methodological quality of the included studies." In 2011 a systematic review concluded that the evidence base surrounding craniosacral therapy and its efficacy was sparse and composed of studies with heterogeneous design. The authors of this review stated that current evidence was insufficient to use to draw conclusions and further study was needed to better evaluate if craniosacral therapy had therapeutic benefit. Further studies had been carried out between 1999 and 2011. A systematic review conducted in 1999 had found "insufficient scientific evidence to recommend craniosacral therapy to patients, practitioners or third party payers for any clinical condition." 
