 A Crutch is a mobility aid used to counter a mobility impairment or an injury that limits walking ability. There are several types of crutches: Walking sticks or canes serve an identical purpose to crutches, but are held only in the hand and have a limited load bearing capability because of this. Several different gait patterns are possible, and the user chooses which one to use depending on the reason the crutches are needed. For example, a person with a non-weight bearing injury generally performs a "swing-to" gait: lifting the affected leg, the user places both crutches in front of himself, and then swings his uninjured leg to meet the crutches. Other gaits are used when both legs are equally affected by some disability, or when the injured leg is partially weight bearing. With underarm crutches, sometimes a towel or some kind of soft cover is needed to prevent or reduce under arm injury. A condition known as crutch paralysis, or crutch palsy can arise from pressure on nerves in the armpit, or axilla. Specifically, "the brachial plexus in the axilla is often damaged from the pressure of a crutch...In these cases the radial is the nerve most frequently implicated; the ulnar nerve suffers next in frequency". The knee scooter and the wheelchair are possible alternatives for patients who cannot use or do not like crutches. These wheeled devices introduce an additional limitation, however, since they cannot negotiate stairs. Emile Schlick, a French mechanical engineer, patented a walking stick that provided an oblique support at the upper end for resting the forearm. This invention was first patented in Nancy (France) on May 7, 1915. Philipp Cederstom patented a similar-looking cane crutch. Finally, the invention of A. R. Lofstrand, Jr., who filed a patent in 1945, consists of an adjustable-length crutch. In the US, forearm crutches are also sometimes referred to as Lofstrands, Canadian crutches (since they are commonly used in Canada), elbow crutches or even Walk Easies (Walk Easy is a brand name). Different variations of walking and mobility devices have appeared on the market, notably one called the Strongarm Forearm Crutch, which is a combination between a traditional walking cane and forearm crutch. The inventor of the Strongarm Forearm Crutch, Michael E. Adams of patented this device 
