 Daniel J. Benor (born July 13, 1941) is a psychiatric physician residing in Canada, practicing as a wholistic psychotherapist and teacher. He has authored many books and articles about various aspects of wholistic self-healing. Benor is Editor-in-Chief of the peer-reviewed, open access International Journal of Healing and Caring, a motivational speaker and a wholistic healing research consultant. Benor was born in New York City on July 13, 1941. He developed his interest in psychotherapy as a teenager. His mother, Ethel Benor, trained as an Occupational Therapist and established the School for Occupational Therapy and Rehabilitation at Hadassah Medical Center in Israel. His father, Judah Leon Benor, was Assistant Director of Arab Education in Israel, and consultant to the World Bank of the United Nations after his retirement. Benor's younger brother, David Benor, is Associate General Counsel, United States Department of Health and Human Services. Benor completed a BA in Psychology at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1961. He trained at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, including an extra year of psychiatric research at the UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute. Benor trained in psychiatry at the University of Cincinnati, serving in the US Air Force Medical Service during the Viet Nam War after his first year in psychiatric residency. He later trained for a year each at Colorado Psychiatric Hospital, Denver, Colorado; and Denver General Hospital, followed by a Community Psychiatry Fellowship, also at Denver General Hospital.Benor has been trained in a many aspects of wholistic healing approaches, including intuition and spiritual awareness, spiritual healing (Therapeutic Touch, Reiki), Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR), Emotional Freedom Techniques (EFT) and a family systems therapy externship at the Philadelphia Child Guidance Clinic, a part of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). Benor is a founding diplomat of the American Board of Integrative Holistic Medicine (ABIHM) Benor has worked as a psychiatric psychotherapist in a school psychology service and in a Kibbutz Child and Family Clinic in Israel, and in various mental health centers in the US. He chose to offer wholistic psychiatric psychotherapy rather than respond to the pressure of insurance company compensation-driven processes that led many US psychiatrists to abandon psychotherapy in preference for the prescription of psychoactive medications.Benor worked in England from 1988 to 1996, where he had a private wholistic psychotherapy practice. He founded the Doctor-Healer Network-UK and began writing a series of books on Healing Research, which are considered classics in this field. Benor returned to the US in 1997, and frustrated by US managed care and insurance companies limiting time for psychiatric sessions; he learned two new recognized methods of therapy: Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) and Emotional Freedom Techniques (EFT). Each had its merits but did not completely resolve the problem of providing a successful therapy method within these time constraints.Benor developed a unique method referred to as “WHEE” a Wholistic Hybrid derived from EMDR and EFT. A pilot research study confirms that this method is as helpful for exam anxiety as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, and further research is in progress by Benor, in collaboration with John Thornton, MD, on effects of WHEE in treatment of people with chronic pain, depression and anxiety, to include SPECT brain scans before and after using this method. The concept of WHEE is aimed at enabling people in physical and/or emotional pain to identify how their pain developed; how it is maintained and perpetuated by the unconscious mind and higher self; and how it can be released through wholistic self-healing. In 2001 Benor founded, the Council for Healing, a group of doctors, nurses and other caregivers and teachers involved with healing; their primary mission is to promote understanding of healing and advance access to healing. For 7 years he was the Coordinator for the council. He continues to be an active member in a non-administrative capacity. Benor is Editor-in-Chief of the open access, peer-reviewed International Journal of Healing and Caring, which publishes clinical, theoretical and research papers related to wholistic healing submitted by his professional peers.Benor is a Professor at Energy Medicine University in California, where he teaches distant learning Phenomenology Research in Wholisitic Spiritual Healing courses and WHEE. He also teaches a course on Transformative Wholistic Reintegration in conjunction with the Integrative Energy Healing department at Langara College in Vancouver, BC. In 2006 Benor moved to Guelph, Ontario, Canada (near Toronto), where he teaches wholistic healing. He is also active in the Transition Guelph group, one of many Transition Town groups around the world, working to develop planetary healing awareness through local initiatives. Benor believes that each conscious being in the universe is part of a cosmic consciousness. He teaches that by understanding and integrating body, emotions, mind, our relationships with the environment and others and lastly, our spirit, we can achieve optimal health through harmonization of our being. Benor believes that the best healthcare is wholistic integrative medicine, which involves assessments and treatments through complementary/alternative therapies combined with assessments and treatments with conventional medical care. Chapter in book on Complementary and Alternative Medicine: Benor, Daniel J. Spiritual Healing, chapter in Essentials of Complementary and Alternative Medicine, Wayne Jonas and Jeffrey Levin (Eds), Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 1998 ISBN 978-0-683-30674-3 Benor, Daniel J. Seven Minutes to Natural Pain Release: Pain is a Choice and Suffering is Optional - WHEE for Tapping Your Pain Away. Bellmawr, NJ: Wholistic Healing Publications 2009 (2nd Ed) Benor, Daniel J. Ledger, Karen. Toussaint, Loren. Hett, Geoffrey. Zaccaro, Daniel . Pilot Study of Emotional Freedom Techniques, Wholistic Hybrid Derived from Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing and Emotional Freedom Technique, and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Treatment of Test Anxiety in University Students, Explore, Nov-Dec 2009, 5(6), 338-340. Annals of Internal Medicine: Astin, John A. Harkness, Elaine. Ernst, Edzard. The Efficacy of “Distant Healing” A Systematic Review of Randomized Trials. Annals of Internal Medicine 2001, 134: 532. British Medical Journal: Zollman, Catherine and Vickers, Andrew. ABC of complementary medicine: What is complementary medicine? British Medical Journal. 1999, 319(7211): 693–696. American Psychological Association website citation: Benor, Daniel J. A psychiatrist examines fears of healing. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 1990, 56(821): 287-299. http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1991-15958-001 Benor, Daniel J. 2010 Alternating Brain Hemisphere Activity and Bilateral Brain Stimulation with WHEE, Hypnosis Research Institute Benor, Daniel J. 2005 Self-healing interventions for clinical practice: Brief psychotherapy with WHEE – the Wholistic hybrid derived from EMDR and EFT, Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice, 11, 270-274. Benor, Daniel J. 2005 Clearing the vessel through which healing pours (Editorial), International J Healing & Caring – On line 2005, 5(2), 1-6. Reprinted in Cohen, Marc. The Art & Science of Holistic Health, Melbourne, Australia: Australasian Integrative Medical Association, 40-51. Benor, Daniel J. 2005 WHEE - the Wholistic Hybrid derived from EMDR and EFT: For stress, pain and allergies, The International Conference on Psychophysiology of Panic Attacks. Benor, Daniel J. 2003. Survival predictions may hasten death, British Medical J, (quick response) 327(7422), 1048. Benor, Daniel J. 2003 Wholistic healing: Working as a doctor and as a healer, Positive Health (UK) April, 87, 16. Benor, Daniel J. 2002 Energy medicine for the internist, Medical Clinics of North America, 86(1), 105-125. Website copy Benor, Daniel J. 2001 Spiritual healing research, in: Rankin-Box, Denise (ed), The Nurse’s Handbook of Complementary Therapies, London: Harcourt. Benor, Daniel J. 1998 Spiritual Healing, chapter in Essentials of Complementary and Alternative Medicine, Wayne Jonas and Jeffrey Levin (Eds), Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Benor, Daniel J. 1996 Five questions on intentionality, science, and mind-body medicine. ADVANCES: The Journal of Mind-Body Health Summer, 12(3): 3-39 Benor, Daniel J. 1994 Spiritual Healing and Psychotherapy. The Therapist (UK), 1(4), 37-39. Reprinted in American Psychiatric Association website, section on Complementary/ Alternative therapies PDF Benor, Daniel J. Survey of spiritual healing research, Complementary Medical Research (retitled Complementary Therapies in Medicine) 1990, 4(3) 9-33 (Excerpted in Larry Dossey, Healing Words, HarperSanFrancisco 1993, 211-235; Translated to Dutch: Spiegel der Parapsychologie: Tijdschrift van de Nederlandse Vereniging voor Parapsychologie, 1993, 32 (2), 90-130; Translated to German, Geistiges Heilen erforschen, Ein Überblick, in Wiesendanger, Harald, Geistiges Heilen für eine neue Zeit: Vom Wunderheilen zur ganzheitlichen Medizin, Munich: Kösel 1999, 89-127). Benor, Daniel J. Spiritual healing and psychotherapy, The Therapist (UK) 1994, 1(4), 37-39 Reprinted in American Psychiatric Association website, section on Complementary/ Alternative therapies PDF/Adobe AcrobatTranslated to German in Spirituelle Psychotherapie, Eine notwendige Weiterentwicklung, in Wiesendanger, Harald, Vom Wunderheilen zur ganzheitlichen Medizin, Munich: Kösel 1999, 216-224). {{Persondata | NAME = Benor, Daniel J.| ALTERNATIVE NAMES = Dr. D.J.Benor| SHORT DESCRIPTION = Dr Benor is a a widely published holistic healing physician noted for his development of the WHEE method.| DATE OF BIRTH = July 13, 1941| PLACE OF BIRTH = New York, NY, USA | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
