 Sir David Thomas Rocyn-Jones CBE, K St J, DL, JP (16 November, 1862-30 April, 1953) was a Welsh medical officer of health and servant of multiple professional bodies within Wales. Rocyn-Jones was born in Rhymney to a notable bonesetter, Thomas Rocyn Jones and Mary Rees, who was a descendent of the preacher Rhys Davies. He was educated at Lewis School, Pengam, and later the University College, Cardiff. Rocyn-Jones passed his MB in 1897 while at University of Edinburgh and then returned to Wales to become a general practitioner in Abertillery where he also held the post of chief surgeon at the Powell colleries. After passing his DPH qualifications in Oxford, he was made the first Medical Officer for Health for Monmouthshire, responsible for prevention strategies for ill-health within the county. When he left the post in 1946, he was succeeded by his son, Gwyn. Rocyn-Jones continued his relationship with University College, Cardiff, becoming its vice-president, and would later become involved in the creation of the University of Wales College of Medicine. In 1920 he was awarded the CBE, and in 1948 was knighted. Rocyn-Jones served on many professional bodies, including the British Medical Association and St. John Ambulance. In 1947 he became Predident of the Welsh Rugby Union, taking over from Horace Lyne, and held the post until his death in 1953. In 1964, his son Nathan would follow his father when he too became President of the WRU. Rocyn Jones married Alla Jones in 1901. They had four sons, two of whom, Gwyn and Nathan, continued the family tradition of entering the medical profession. Nathan would not only follow his grandfather's profession, of working with bones, by becoming an orthopaedic surgeon, but would also continue the family links to rugby by representing Wales in 1925. Rocyn-Jones was a religious man and a staunch Congregationalist. {{Persondata | NAME = Rocyn-Jones, David | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 1862 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH = 1953 | PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
