 Delayed ejaculation, also called retarded ejaculation or inhibited ejaculation, is the inability to ejaculate or persistent difficulty in achieving orgasm despite the presence of normal sexual desire and sexual stimulation. Normally a man can achieve orgasm within a few minutes of active thrusting during sexual intercourse, whereas a man with delayed ejaculation either does not have orgasms at all or cannot have an orgasm until after prolonged intercourse which might last for 30–45 minutes or more. In most cases delayed ejaculation presents the condition in which the man can climax and ejaculate only during masturbation, but not during sexual intercourse. It is an uncommon of the male sexual dysfunctions, but can result as a side effect of some medications. In one survey, 8% of men reported being unable to achieve orgasm over a 2-month period or longer in the the previous year.Strassberg, D. S., & Perelman, M. A. (2009). Sexual dysfunctions. In P. H. Blaney & T. Millon (Eds.), Oxford textbook of psychopathology (2nd ed.), (pp. 399–430). NY: Oxford University Press. Psychological causes of delayed ejaculation might include numerous factors that prevent a man from achieving orgasm during sexual intercourse. Among those factors are insufficient sleep, distraction due to worry, distraction from the environment, anxiety about pleasing his partner and anxiety about relationship problems. One proposed cause of delayed ejaculation is adaptation to a certain masturbatory technique. The sensations a man feels when masturbating may bear little resemblance to the sensations he experiences during intercourse. Factors such as pressure, angle and grip during masturbation can make for an experience so different from sex with a partner that the ability to ejaculate is reduced or eliminated. Difficulty in achieving orgasm can also result from pelvic surgery that involved trauma to pelvic nerves which are responsible for orgasm. Some men report a lack of sensation in the nerves of the glans penis, which may or may not be related to external factors, including a history of circumcision. Delayed ejaculation might be a side effect of some medications, usually of some antidepressants (e.g. Paxil), antipsychotics (mellaril) and antihypertensives (guanethidine). Ejaculation will also take longer if the man has recently ejaculated. Another reason for delayed ejaculation is excessive use of alcohol (colloquially referred to as "whiskey dick" and "brewer's droop"). In this case physical and psychological causes might co-exist. Opiate-based medications and recreational drugs can prevent or delay ejaculation as they paralyze or slow all involuntary muscles, such as the ones that control dilation of the eyes, digestion, urination and ejaculation. Weight can also be a factor, as it slows blood flow to the penis. More recently, the prevalence and easy access to pornography of any flavor a man prefers, has increasingly lead to a frequent level of external or visual stimulation that is hard to create with a partner. The psychological association with such visual stimulation can become habitual. Similar to how the specific physical stimulation of his own hand with frequent masturbation can lead to delayed insertive ejaculation (or in some cases, the inability to ejaculate), when the man is unable to duplicate (with insertional intercourse) the type of stimulation he gets from his own hand. In this case, he is unable to duplicate the stimulation he gets visually/mentally from frequent use of pornography. Although one cause is physical and the other cause is psychological, the result can be the same. Psychological factors are widely known to have a tremendous sexual side effects, including delayed ejaculation, premature ejaculation and erectile dysfunction. Therapy usually involves homework assignments and exercises intended to help a man get used to having orgasms through insertional intercourse, vaginal, anal, or oral, that is through the way he is not accustomed to. Commonly the couple is advised to go through three stages. At the first stage a man masturbates in the presence of his partner. Sometimes this is not an easy matter as a man might be used to having orgasms alone. After a man learns to ejaculate in the presence of his partner, the couple gets to another stage where the man's hand is replaced with the hand of his partner. Step by step a man learns to ejaculate closer and closer to the desired orifice. In the final stage the receptive partner inserts the insertive partner's penis into the partner's vagina, anus or mouth as soon as the ejaculation is felt to be imminent. Thus a man gradually learns to ejaculate inside the desired orifice. In some cases hypnosis can help with the problem, especially if a partner does not want to participate in therapy. Meditation has also been seen to be effective in case studies. There is yet no reliable medication for delayed ejaculation. PDE5 inhibitors such as Viagra have little effect. In fact, Viagra has a delaying effect on ejaculation, possibly through additional effect in the brain or decrease of sensitivity in the head of the penis. 
