 Dr. Dennis Embleton MRCS, FRCS, LSA, MD (Pisa) MD FRCP, (1 Oct 1800 – 12 Nov 1900) was a Newcastle medical doctor and surgeon of the middle and late 19th century. Dennis Embleton was born in Newcastle on 1 October 1810. His father, Thomas Embleton was born in East Chevington and his mother Anne (née Cawood) from Alwinton village which is west of Alnwick and at the head of the River Coquet. He had an elder brother Thomas William Embleton, was trained as a mining engineer and moved in 1831 to Middleton, Leeds, to the position of colliery viewer His father died in 1820, and Dennis and his brother Thomas were brought up by an uncle, George Hill, also a colliery viewer, of Kenton, Newcastle. Both he and his brother Thomnas William were educated at Witton-le-Wear Grammar School, County Durham, under the Rev. George Newby. After leaving Witton School, he started his apprenticeship on 23 April 1827, bound to a Mr. T. Leighton, the Senior Surgeon at Newcastle Infirmary for a period of five years, the cost of which to his guardian, was £500, not an inconsiderately sum in those days. He left Newcastle before the end of his apprenticeship, with the permission and consent of Mr. Leighton, to complete his studies in London at Guy's Hospital, St Thomas' Hospital, Grainger's anatomical school at Maze Pond (in London), and probably also at Pilcher's School of Anatomy. He qualified in 1834 and after working for around a year, he went off with another medical student, William Croser, to spend the next two years travelling, mainly on foot, around Europe, both of course speaking French and Italian very well. They journeyed to Paris, Strasburg, Baden, Switzerland, over the Simplon Pass, Milan, Genoa, Rome, Bologna, Pisa, Florence, Venice, Trieste, Vienna, The Tyrol and back to Paris, All the time, in addition to seeing the sights, they visited numerous medical establishments, and at Pisa they petitioned the university, sat the examination for doctorate of medicine, passed and were granted diplomas on 14 September 1836 He was married in 1847 in in Whickham to Miss Elizabeth Turner (died 1869), who also had a great interest in nature and the sciences; They had three children :- Dennis Cawood Embleton (b. 9 March 1854), MD, MRCS, who predeceased him by a few months at Bournemouth, where he had a large practice. And two daughters, one married His grandson, also Dennis Embleton (b 14 March 1881) L.R.C.P. (MRCS at Christ's College, Cambridge 1906), also went into the medical profession. In 1898 he had an accident which took its toll and two years later, at the age of 90 years, he died at his home, 19 Claremont Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, early on the morning of Monday 12 November 1900. He was buried in St Andrew's Cemetery, Newcastle A portrait of Dr Dennis Embleton accompanies his biography in The Lancet, and his photograph is in the Fellows' Album (1867) Dr Dennis Embleton had a keen interest in languages, and also in the local Geordie dialect, and wrote a document on the peculiarities of the local dialect in 1887, followed by a “canny little poem” called “The Ahd Pitman's Po'try tiv ees Marrah”. This poem appeared in the Newcastle Courant around 1890 with no indication of authorship, but Thomas Allan in his Illustrated Edition of Tyneside Songs attributed it to Embleton. This was later shown to be correct when details of his works were produced and printed with his bibliography details in his official obituary. Includes :- and June, 1884 ; Note on the occurrence of Shrimps in the Tyne and Note on the capture of Tunnies and of a fine specimen of the *Bergylt' off the Tyne. June, 1884 Geordie dialect wordsThomas AllanAllan's Illustrated Edition of Tyneside Songs and Readings {{Persondata | NAME = Embleton, Dennis | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = Doctor, surgeon, traveller, antiquarian, naturalist, poet| DATE OF BIRTH = 01-10-1810| PLACE OF BIRTH = Newcastle upon Tyne| DATE OF DEATH = 12-11-1900| PLACE OF DEATH = Newcastle upon Tyne}} 
