 Dent's disease (or Dent disease) is a rare X-linked recessive inherited condition that affects the proximal renal tubules of the kidney. It is one cause of Fanconi syndrome, and is characterized by tubular proteinuria, hypercalciuria, calcium nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis and chronic renal failure. "Dent's disease" is often used to describe an entire group of familial disorders, including X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis with renal failure, X-linked recessive hypophosphataemic rickets, and both Japanese and idiopathic low-molecular-weight proteinuria. About 60% of patients have mutations in the CLCN5 gene (Dent 1), which encodes a kidney-specific chloride/proton antiporter, and 15% of patients have mutations in the OCRL1 gene (Dent 2) Dent's disease was first described by Charles Enrique Dent and M. Friedman in 1964, when they reported two unrelated British boys with rickets associated with renal tubular damage characterized by hypercalciuria, hyperphosphaturia, proteinuria, and aminoaciduria. This set of symptoms was not given a name until 30 years later, when the nephrologist Oliver Wrong more fully described the disease.Wrong had studied with Dent and chose to name the disease after his mentor. Dent's disease is a genetic disorder caused by the genetic mutations in the renal chloride channel CLCN5, which encodes a kidney-specific, voltage-gated chloride channel and a 746-amino-acid protein (CLC-5), with 12 to 13 transmembrane domains; it manifests itself through low-molecular-weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, aminoaciduria and hypophosphataemia. Because of its rather rare occurrence, Dent's disease is often diagnosed as idiopathic hypercalciuria, i.e., excess calcium in urine with undetermined causes. Dent's disease is a X-linked recessive disorder. The males are prone to manifesting symptoms in early adulthood with symptoms of calculi, rickets or even with renal failure in more severe cases. In humans, gene CLCN5 is located on chromosome Xp11.22, and has a 2238-bp coding sequence that consists of 11 exons that span 25 to 30 kb of genomic DNA and encode a 746-amino-acid protein. CLCN5 belongs to the family of voltage-gated chloride channel genes (CLCN1-CLCN7, CLCKa and CLCKb) that have about 12 transmembrane domains. These chloride channels have an important role in the control of membrane excitability, transepithelial transport, and possibly cell volume. The mechanisms by which CLC-5 dysfunction results in hypercalciuria and the other features of Dent's disease remain to be elucidated. The identification of additional CLCN5 mutations may help in these studies. Dent disease 2 (nephrolithiasis type 2) is associated with the OCRL gene. Both Lowe syndrome (oculocerebrorenal syndrome) and Dent disease can be caused by truncating or missense mutations in OCRL. Dent's disease often produces symptoms of: Dent's disease may also be associated with: In a study of 25 patients with Dent's disease, 9 of 15 men, and one of 10 women suffered end-stage renal failure by the age of 47. As of today, there is no agreed-upon treatment of Dent's disease and no therapy has been formally accepted. Most treatment measures are mostly supportive in nature; they include: 
