 Disorganized schizophrenia, also known as hebephrenia, is a subtype of schizophrenia, as defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-IV code 295.10. Disorganized schizophrenia is thought to be an extreme expression of the disorganization syndrome that has been hypothesized to be one aspect of a three-factor model of symptoms in schizophrenia, the other factors being reality distortion (involving delusions and hallucinations) and psychomotor poverty (poverty of speech, lack of spontaneous movement and various aspects of blunting of emotion). The prominent characteristics of this form are disorganized behavior and speech, (see formal thought disorder) including schizophasia, and flat or inappropriate emotion and affect. In addition, psychiatrists must rule out any possible sign of catatonic schizophrenia. The condition is also known as hebephrenia, named after the Greek goddess of youth, Hebe, in reference to the typical age of onset in puberty. Unlike paranoid schizophrenia, delusions and hallucinations are not the most prominent feature, although fragmentary delusions and hallucinations may be present. A person with disorganized schizophrenia may also experience behavioral disorganization which may impair his or her ability to carry out daily activities, such as showering or eating. The emotional responses of such people often seem strange or inappropriate. Inappropriate facial responses may be common, and behavior is sometimes described as 'silly', such as inappropriate laughter. Sometimes there is a complete lack of emotion, including anhedonia (the lack of pleasure), and avolition (a lack of motivation). Some of these features are also present in other types of schizophrenia, but they are most prominent in disorganized schizophrenia. This form of schizophrenia is typically associated with early onset (often between the ages of 15 and 25 years) and is thought to have a poor prognosis because of the rapid development of 'negative' symptoms and decline in social functioning. Use of electroconvulsive therapy has been proposed; however, the effectiveness after treatment is in question. 
