 The Doctors' Trial (officially United States of America v. Karl Brandt, et al.) was the first of 12 trials for war crimes of German doctors that the United States authorities held in their occupation zone in Nuremberg, Germany after the end of World War II. These trials were held before US military courts, not before the International Military Tribunal, but took place in the same rooms at the Palace of Justice. The trials are collectively known as the "Subsequent Nuremberg Trials", formally the "Trials of War Criminals before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals" (NMT). Twenty of the 23 defendants were medical doctors (Viktor Brack, Rudolf Brandt, and Wolfram Sievers were Nazi officials) and were accused of having been involved in Nazi human experimentation and mass murder under the guise of euthanasia. Josef Mengele, one of the leading Nazi doctors, had evaded capture. The judges in this case, heard before Military Tribunal I, were Walter B. Beals (presiding judge) from Washington, Harold L. Sebring from Florida, and Johnson T. Crawford from Oklahoma, with Victor C. Swearingen, a former special assistant to the Attorney General of the United States, as an alternate judge. The Chief of Counsel for the Prosecution was Telford Taylor and the chief prosecutor was James M. McHaney. The indictment was filed on October 25, 1946; the trial lasted from December 9 that year until August 20, 1947. Of the 23 defendants, seven were acquitted and seven received death sentences; the remainder received prison sentences ranging from 10 years to life imprisonment. The accused faced four charges, including: The tribunal largely dropped count 1, stating that the charge was beyond its jurisdiction. Defendants, functions, verdicts, and fates Name Photograph Function Charges Verdict and sentence     12   Hermann Becker-Freyseng Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe (Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) I G G 20 years' imprisonment, commuted to 10 years—died 1961 Wilhelm Beiglböck Consulting Physician to the Luftwaffe I G G 15 years' imprisonment, commuted to 10 years—died 1963 Kurt Blome Deputy [of the] Reich Health Leader (Reichsgesundheitsführer); and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the Reich Research Council I I I acquitted at Doctors' Trial but later convicted by French authorities and sentenced to 20 years—died 1969 Viktor Brack Oberführer (Senior Colonel) in the SS and Sturmbannführer (Major) in the Waffen SS I G G death Karl Brandt Personal physician to Adolf Hitler I G G death Rudolf Brandt Standartenführer (Colonel) I G G death Fritz Fischer Sturmbannführer (Major) in the Waffen SS I G G lifetime imprisonment, commuted to 15 years released 1954 Karl Gebhardt Gruppenführer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Lieutenant General) in the Waffen SS I G G death Karl Genzken Gruppenführer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Lieutenant General) in the Waffen SS I G G lifetime imprisonment, commuted to 20 years released 1954—died 1957 Siegfried Handloser Generaloberstabsarzt (Colonel General, Medical Service) I G G lifetime imprisonment, commuted to 20 years—released/died 1954 Waldemar Hoven Hauptsturmführer (Captain) in the Waffen SS I G G death Joachim Mrugowsky Oberführer (Senior Colonel) in the Waffen SS I G G death Herta Oberheuser Physician at the Ravensbrück concentration camp I G G 20 years' imprisonment, commuted to 10 years released 1952—died 1978 Adolf Pokorny Physician, Specialist in Skin and Venereal Diseases I I I acquitted Helmut Poppendick Oberführer (Senior Colonel) in the SS I I I 10 years imprisonment, released 1951—died 1994 Hans Wolfgang Romberg Doctor on the Staff of the Department for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute for Aviation I I I acquitted—died 1981 Gerhard Rose Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier General, Medical Service of the Air Force) I G G lifetime imprisonment, commuted to 20 years released 1955—died 1992 Paul Rostock Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in Berlin I I I acquitted—died 1956 Siegfried Ruff Director of the Department for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute for Aviation (Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt) and First Lieutenant in the Medical Service of the Air Force I I I acquitted—died 1989 Konrad Schäfer Doctor on the Staff of the Institute for Aviation Medicine in Berlin I I I acquitted Oskar Schröder Generaloberstabsarzt (Colonel General Medical Service) I G G lifetime imprisonment, commuted to 15 years, released 1954—died 1958 Wolfram Sievers Standartenführer (Colonel) in the SS I G G death Georg August Weltz Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieutenant Colonel, Medical Service, of the Air Force) I I I acquitted I — Indicted   G — Indicted and found guilty Those sentenced to death were hanged on June 2, 1948 in Landsberg prison, Bavaria. For some, the difference between receiving a prison term and the death sentence was membership in the SS, "an organization declared criminal by the judgement of the International Military Tribunal". However, some SS medical personnel received prison sentences. The degree of personal involvement and/or presiding over groups involved was a factor in others. 
