 Donald Robert James Singer is president of the Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine. He was born in Forres, Scotland and attended schools in Iraq, Bahrain, and Scotland. Singer is professor of clinical pharmacology and therapeutics at the graduate medical school of the University of Warwick, where he was appointed in 2003. He was awarded Bachelor of Medical Biology and Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery degrees from the University of Aberdeen in 1975 and 1978 respectively, followed by the MD degree in 1995. He served as Senior Lecturer/Consultant and then Reader at St George's Hospital Medical School from 1996–2003, having previously trained at the Aberdeen Teaching Hospitals, Hammersmith Hospital, the Royal Postgraduate Medical School, and the Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School. While at St George's, he held honorary research posts at the Harefield Heart Science Centre, a research facility of the National Heart and Lung Institute, a Division of the Faculty of Medicine of Imperial College. In 2007, Singer was elected president of the Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine. His interests include new approaches to personalising medicine, chemical and genomic research for the discovery of medicines, prevention and treatment of hypertension and other disorders of the heart and circulation, and public understanding of health. He is a co-author of the Pocket Prescriber, a paper and electronic guide on safe and effective use of medicines for health students and prescribers, in publication with 5 editions since 2004. Singer has been active on many medical and professional committees, including for the British Hypertension Society, the London Hypertension Society (President 1990-2002), the British Pharmacological Society, the West Midlands Physicians Association, the European Union of Medical Specialists, the European Association of Internal Medicine, and the European Federation of Internal Medicine. He was a co-founder and founding associate editor of the EFIM journal, the European Journal of Internal Medicine. He is a member of the National Health Service Health Technology Assessment Programme Pharmaceuticals Panel, member of Council and Chairman of the Committee of Heads of Clinical Pharmacology of the British Pharmacological Society, an Executive Committee member of the British Microcirculation Society, and secretary of the European Association for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics. He is an honorary Fellow of the Finnish Society for Internal Medicine and the European Federation of Internal Medicine. He is also chair of the Advisory Board for the new journal of the Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine: Health Policy and Technology. He was co-founder in 2009 with Michael Hulse of the Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine for UK NHS-related poets and the International Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine. Singer, Michael Hulse and Sorcha Gunne won the 2011 Times Higher Education Award for Excellence and Innovation in the Arts for the Hippocrates poetry and medicine initiative. This award aims to recognise the collaborative and interdisciplinary work within universities and their external partners to promote the arts. In 2012, he co-founded with Michael Hulse the international Hippocrates Prize for Schools for poetry on a medical theme. He was formerly a trustee of the Richmond Orchestra (London) and Ealing Junior Music School (London). In 2010 he co-founded the "Healthy Heart Awards" for schools and colleges. The inaugural 2011 Healthy Heart Awards were organised by the Cardiovascular Research Trust and supported by "Heads, Teachers and Industry". {{Persondata | NAME = Singer, Donald | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = BRitish pharmacologist | DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH = Forres, Morayshire, Scotland | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
