 Douglas Blayney is an oncologist in the United States and is very involved with several clinical oncological organizations within the United States. He is internationally recognized for his expertise in oncology quality and informatics and hematological malignancy. He has currently been elected to become president of the American Society for Clinical Oncology, and works at the University of Michigan as the medical director of the university's cancer center. He specializes in hematology and oncology, but his research specializes in breast cancer, lymphoma, and the use of electronic technology to enhance medical practice. Douglas Blayney was born and raised in Fowler, California a small, rural farming community in Fresno Valley. He was born to James and Grace Blayney. Douglas’s father, James Blayney, suffered from Multiple Sclerosis for most of his life and eventually died as a result of the disease. Blayney attended the local, public high school along with his two siblings. Douglas Blayney attended Stanford University from 1968 to 1972, where he received his Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering. He was also a member of Stanford's Greek Life System as a member of Sigma Chi Fraternity. Blayney went on to earn his M.D. at the University of California at San Diego School of Medicine in 1977. After receiving his M.D., Blayney completed his residency at the University of California at San Diego from 1977 to 1980. After graduating in 1980, Blayney became certified to practice internal medicine, while in 1983 he received his certification in medical oncology where he also completed his fellowship in oncology at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Maryland. Blayney worked as a medical oncologist and hematologist for the private practice the Wilshire Oncology Medical Group, Inc, in Pasadena, California. Blayney worked at Wilshire Oncology for 17 years, from 1986 to 2003. Blayney’s experience was extended to medical director of the University of Michigan’s Comprehensive Cancer Center in July 2003, where he still works today. Blayney, who serves as the Clinical Professor of Internal Medicine at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor oversees breast cancer and lymphoma patients, and is responsible for overseeing two dozen cancer care clinics in the Comprehensive Cancer Center. When appointed as Medical Director at the University of Michigan, Blayney said that he was “excited to join the team at the University of Michigan and to be a part of one of the nation’s top comprehensive cancer centers,” adding that, “it’s an unparalleled opportunity to learn from world class people, and for me to help the U-M Comprehensive Cancer Center fulfill its mission of patient care, research and teaching. Blayney is currently the president of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, a non-profit organization aimed at “improving the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer”. Blayney also served on the Food and Drug Administration’s Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee from 1999–2003, and is a member of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Most recently Blayney has been hired to return to Stamford University to become the Ann and John Doerr Medical Center Director, effective July 1, 2010. {{Persondata | NAME = Blayney, Douglas | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
