 There are several classes of drugs for acid-related disorders, such as dyspepsia, peptic ulcer disease (PUD), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GORD/GERD), or laryngopharyngeal reflux. The World Health Organization gives drugs in these classes the categorization code ATC code A02. The H<sub>2</sub> receptor antagonists are a class of drugs used to block the action of histamine on parietal cells in the stomach, decreasing the production of acid by these cells. H<sub>2</sub> antagonists are used in the treatment of dyspepsia, although they have been surpassed in popularity by the more effective proton pump inhibitors. H<sub>2</sub> receptor antagonists are named using the suffix "-tidine". Proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) are a group of drugs whose main action is a pronounced and long-lasting reduction of gastric acid production. They are the most potent inhibitors of acid secretion available. The group followed and has largely superseded another group of pharmaceuticals with similar effects, but a different mode of action, called H<sub>2</sub>-receptor antagonists. These drugs are among the most widely sold drugs in the world, and are generally considered effective. Proton-pump inhibitors are named using the suffix "-prazole". A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived enzymatically from fatty acids and have important functions in the animal body. Every prostaglandin contains 20 carbon atoms, including a 5-carbon ring. They are mediators and have a variety of strong physiological effects, such as regulating the contraction and relaxation of smooth muscle tissue. There are many prostaglandins with many effects. Prostaglandin E2 has effects including reducing gastric acid and increasing gastric mucus, which among other effects treat acid-related disorders. Prostaglandins are named using the root term "-prost-". Other drugs which have been used to treat acid-related disorders are not part of the above categories and function through a variety of mechanisms. Availability of drugs for acid-related disorders drug class Examples of countries where some dosages are available without prescription Examples of countries where available in generic form Omeprazole PPI United States United States Lansoprazole PPI United States Omeprazole/sodium bicarbonate PPI United States Pantoprazole PPI United States Ranitidine H2 antagonist United States In the United States, all four FDA-approved members of the group—cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine—are available over the counter in relatively low doses. 
