 Dyshidrosis (also known as "acute vesiculobullous hand eczema," "cheiropompholyx," "dyshidrotic eczema," "pompholyx," and "podopompholyx") is a skin condition that is characterized by small blisters on the hands or feet. It is an acute, chronic, or recurrent dermatosis of the fingers, palms, and soles, characterized by a sudden onset of many deep-seated pruritic, clear vesicles; later, scaling, fissures and lichenification occur. Recurrence is common and for many can be chronic. Incidence/prevalence is said to be 1/5,000 in the United States. However, many cases of eczema are diagnosed as garden-variety atopic eczema without further investigation, so it is possible that this figure is misleading. This condition is not contagious to others, but the compromised integument can increase susceptibility to infection, and the accompanying itching can be a source of psychological duress. The name comes from the word "dyshidrotic," meaning "bad sweating," which was once believed to be the cause, but this association is unproven; there are many cases present that have no history of excessive sweating. There are many different factors that may trigger the outbreak of dyshidrosis such as allergens, physical and/or mental stress, or seasonal changes. Small blisters with the following characteristics: Causes of dyshidrosis are unknown. However, a number of triggers to the condition exist: Oral Al1itretinoin (9-cis-Retinoic Acid) Therapy for Chronic Hand Dermatitis in Patients Refractory to Standard TherapyResults of a Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-Controlled, Multicenter TrialThomas Ruzicka, MD; Frederik Grønhøj Larsen, MD, PhD; Dorota Galewicz, MD; Attila Horváth, MD; Peter Jan Coenraads, MD; Kristian Thestrup-Pedersen, MD; Jean Paul Ortonne, MD; Christos C. Zouboulis, MD; Martin Harsch, PhD; Thomas C. Brown, PhD; Maurice Zultak). Some sufferers claim diet can ease symptoms (relieving internal condition of IBS or intestinal yeast infection). Also Inflammatory bowel diseases of Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. Allergy testing is a contested subject among eczema communities. Some dermatologists posit that, if a sufferer is allergic to a substance, then a general allergy test on the forearm will suffice. However, others believe that, with conditions like dyshidrosis, the suspect substances must be applied to the affected area to induce a reaction. It is often seen in people already susceptible to allergies and/or asthma. There are many treatments available for dyshidrosis. However, few of them have been developed or tested specifically on the condition. Journal compilation # 2007 Blackwell Munksgaard CONTACT DERMATITIS Management of chronic hand eczemaTHOMAS L. DIEPGEN, TOVE AGNER, WERNER ABERER, JOHN BERTH-JONES, FRE´ DE´ RIC CAMBAZARD, PETER ELSNER, JOHN MCFADDEN AND PIETER JAN COENRAADS1Department of Clinical Social Medicine, Occupational & Environmental Dermatology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69115, Germany,2Department of Dermatology, University of Copenhagen, Roskilde Sygehus, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark, 3Department of Dermatology, University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria,4Department of Dermatology, University Hospitals Coventry and Warkwickshire NHS Trust, Coventry CV2 2DX, UK,5Department of Dermatology, 42055 St Etienne, France,6Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07740 Jena, Germany,7St Thomas Hospital, St Johns Institute of Dermatology, London, UK, and8Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands 
