 The genus Ebolavirus is a virological taxon included in the family Filoviridae, order Mononegavirales. This genus was introduced in 1998 as the "Ebola-like viruses". In 2002 the name was changed to Ebolavirus and in 2010 the genus was emended. The name Ebolavirus is derived from the Ebola River in Zaire (where Ebola virus was first discovered) and the taxonomic suffix -virus (denoting a viral genus). The species in this genus are called ebolaviruses. Currently includes five virus species are recognised: Bundibugyo ebolavirus, Reston ebolavirus, Sudan ebolavirus, Taï Forest ebolavirus (originally Côte d'Ivoire ebolavirus) and Zaire ebolavirus. The ebolaviruses are responsible for hemorrhagic fever. Ebolavirus is pronounced iːˌboʊlə’vɑɪrəs (IPA) or ee-boh-luh-vahy-ruhs in English phonetic notation. According to the rules for taxon naming established by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), the name Ebolavirus is always to be capitalized, italicized, never abbreviated, and to be preceded by the word "genus". The names of its members (ebolaviruses) are to be written in lower case, are not italicized, and used without articles. A virus of the family Filoviridae is a member of the genus Ebolavirus if The genera Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus were originally classified as the species of the now-obsolete Filovirus genus. In March, 1998, the Vertebrate Virus Subcommittee proposed in the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) to change the Filovirus genus to the Filoviridae family with two specific genera: Ebola-like viruses and Marburg-like viruses. This proposal was implemented in Washington, D.C., as of April, 2001 and in Paris as of July, 2002. In 2000, another proposal was made in Washington, D.C., to change the "-like viruses" to "-virus" resulting in today's Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus. The five characterised Ebola species are: Rates of genetic change are one one-hundredth as fast as influenza A in humans, but on the same magnitude as those of hepatitis B. Extrapolating backwards using these rates indicates Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus diverged several thousand years ago. However, paleoviruses (genomic fossils) of filoviruses (Filoviridae) found in mammals indicate that the family itself is at least tens of millions of years old. Genus Ebolavirus: species and viruses Species name Virus name (Abbreviation) Bundibugyo ebolavirus (accepted) Bundibugyo virus (BDBV Reston ebolavirus Reston virus (RESTV Sudan ebolavirus Sudan virus (SUDV Taï Forest ebolavirus Taï Forest virus (TAFV Zaire ebolavirus* Ebola virus (EBOV Table legend: "*" denotes type species and "accepted" refers to taxa that have been accepted by the Executive Committee of the ICTV but that have yet to be ratified. 
