 Edward Bove is a Professor in the Department of Surgery at the University of Michigan School of Medicine, Michigan, United States. Bove is also the Head of the Section of Cardiac Surgery, the Director of the Division of Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery, and the Co-Director of the Michigan Congenital Heart Center at the University of Michigan Health System in Ann Arbor, Michigan. He is well known for his contributions to the repair of congenital heart defects, most notably Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome. Bove was born and raised in New York. He received his bachelor's degree from the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Massachusetts in 1968, and his medical degree from Albany Medical College, Albany, New York in 1972. Bove performed his post-doctoral training at: Bove was an Assistant Professor of Surgery from 1980-1983 at the Health Science Center Syracuse. From 1983-1985, he was an Associate Professor of Surgery at the Health Science Center Syracuse. Bove became an Associate Professor of Surgery at the University of Michigan in 1985. In 1988, Bove was elevated to Professor of Surgery at the University of Michigan. In 1999, he was appointed head of the Section of Cardiac Surgery for the University. Bove is considered one of the world's outstanding pediatric cardiac surgeons, and is particularly renowned for his work with the Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome.Bove is also the author of 224 articles on the repair of congenital heart defects. He is board-certified in both General and Cardiac surgery. Bove has received recognition for his work including being listed in Who's Who in Health and Medical Services and the Best Doctors in America. Bove is also on the board of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery. More recently, Bove became one of the public faces of the University of Michigan Health System by being prominently featured in the System's new marketing campaign. Bove is married and has two children, Christopher and Susan. {{Persondata | NAME = Bove, Edward | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
