 In cardiovascular physiology, ejection fraction (EF) represents the volumetric fraction of blood pumped out of the ventricle (heart) with each heart beat or cardiac cycle. It can be applied to either the right ventricle which ejects via the pulmonary valve into the pulmonary circulation or the left ventricle which ejects via the aortic valve into the systemic circulation. Imaging of the physiology of the mammalian heart is the art that allows meaningful mathematical expression defining EF. Noninvasive cardiac imaging has become a worldwide utility enabling study of cardiac performance reproducibly and inexpensively.Simplified, Ejection fraction is a mathematical product allowed by cardiac imaging. As a mathematical term, Ejection Fraction is an extension of the work of Adolph Fick in cardiac output. Dedicated technology such as Echocardiography, Computed Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging and MUGA scanning have definitively allowed clinically relevant mathematics regarding Ischemia, Congenital Heart Disease and Heart Failure. By definition, the volume of blood within a ventricle immediately before a contraction is known as the end-diastolic volume. Similarly, the volume of blood left in a ventricle at the end of contraction is end-systolic volume. The difference between end-diastolic volume (EDV) and end-systolic volumes (ESV) is the stroke volume, the volume of blood ejected with each beat. Ejection fraction (E<sub>f</sub>) is the fraction of the end-diastolic volume that is ejected with each beat; that is, it is stroke volume (SV) divided by end-diastolic volume (EDV): <div style="float:right"></div> In a healthy man, the SV is approximately 70 mL and the left ventricular EDV is 120 mL, giving an ejection fraction of , or 0.58 (58%). Right ventricular volumes being roughly equal to those of the left ventricle, the ejection fraction of the right ventricle is normally equal to that of the left ventricle within narrow limits. Healthy individuals typically have ejection fractions between 50% and 65%. However, normal values depend upon the modality being used to calculate the ejection fraction, and some sources consider an ejection fraction of 55–75% to be normal. Damage to the muscle of the heart (myocardium), such as that sustained during myocardial infarction or in atrial fibrillation or a plurality of etiologies of cardiomyopathy, compromises the heart's ability to perform as an efficient pump (ejecting blood) and therefore reduces ejection fraction. This reduction in the ejection fraction can manifest itself clinically as heart failure. A low ejection fraction has its cutoff below 40% with symptomatic manifestations constant at 25%. In the USA, a chronically low ejection fraction less than 30% is qualifying support for eligibility of disability benefits from the Social Security Administration. Healthy older adults favorably adapt as the ventricles become less compliant and are routinely echocardiographically proven to have an EF from 55–85% with the help of good genetics and a healthy lifestyle. Compliance changevolume /changepressure is a property of the heart that allows Contractility. Encyclopedic documentation of the commonly documented "Hyperdynamic" ventricle remains sparse. The ejection fraction is one of the most important predictors of prognosis; those with significantly reduced ejection fractions typically have poorer prognoses. However, recent studies have indicated that a preserved ejection fraction does not mean freedom from risk. The QT interval as recorded on a standard electrocardiogram or "EKG" represents ventricular depolarazation and ventricular repolarazation and is rate dependent. Ejection fraction is commonly measured by echocardiography, in which the volumes of the heart's chambers are measured during the cardiac cycle. Ejection fraction can then be obtained by dividing stroke volume by end-diastolic volume as described above. Accurate volumetric measurement of performance of the right and left ventricles of the heart is inexpensively and routinely echocardiographically interpreted worldwide as a ratio of dimension between the ventricles in systole and diastole. For example, a ventricle in greatest dimension could measure 6 cm while in least dimension 4 cm. Measured and easily reproduced beat to beat for ten or more cycles, this ratio may represent a physiologically normal EF of 50-60%. Mathematical expression of this Time dependent ratio can then be interpreted as the greater half as cardiac output and the lesser half as cardiac input. Other methods of measuring ejection fraction include cardiac MRI, fast scan cardiac computed axial tomography (CT) imaging, ventriculography, Gated SPECT, and the MUGA scan. A MUGA scan involves the injection of a radioisotope into the blood and detecting its flow through the left ventricle. The historical gold standard for the measurement of ejection fraction is ventriculography. Depending on the EF number, a physician may make recommendations to help improve the EF. In some cases, medication may be prescribed. There are also other things which could be done to improve how well the heart pumps.Limiting Salt – Limiting salt (sodium) to 2,000 mg a day is an important part of maintaining a healthy heart and treating heart failure. With a low EF, the kidneys get less blood than they should. This makes them unable to rid the body of excess water and salt. Eating too much salt can lead to even more fluid buildup. It also increases blood pressure, which makes an already weakened heart work harder.Fluid Management – With a low EF, blood can back up in the lungs and force fluid into the breathing spaces. The fluid then builds up, making it difficult to breathe. Excess fluid can also cause weight gain and swelling. Depending on the EF, a doctor may limit the amount of daily fluid intake.Physical Activity – Exercise can help strengthen the heart and improve how well it pumps blood to the rest of the body. All it takes is 30 minutes a day of activity, even if that activity is walking. It is always recommended that patients consult their doctors about an exercise program that is right for them. Many people who have survived a heart attack can benefit from a medical device called an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD). An ICD is a pacemaker-like device that treats ventricular fibrillation (VF), the deadly heart rhythm that causes sudden cardiac arrest (SCA).Several large clinical studies have been conducted in recent years to see if ICDs could help prevent SCA in those people whose heart muscle, and its pumping ability, is damaged by a heart attack. People in the studies had an ejection fraction (EF) of 40 or below. In these studies, survival rates were significantly higher for people with ICDs compared to those who received traditional medical care. Certain medications help reduce the heart's workload, increase blood flow, widen vessels or eliminate excess water from the body, all which may help treating low ejection fraction. Prescribed medications may include: 
