 Elias I. Traboulsi (born May 19, 1957) is an internationally-renowned physician who has played a prominent role in the fields of Ophthalmic Genetics and Pediatric Ophthalmology Elias Traboulsi was born May 19, 1957 in Beirut, Lebanon, to Iskandar and Renée Traboulsi. His father, an educator, was particularly influential on Traboulsi’s career. Dr. Traboulsi earned a Bachelor degree in Science in 1977 and a Doctorate in Medicine in 1982 at the American University of Beirut. Traboulsi completed a residency in Ophthalmology at the American University of Beirut Medical Center in 1985. He then moved to the United States, to complete a fellowship in Ophthalmic Genetics at the Wilmer Ophthalmological Institute of Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland. He then continued his training with a residency in Ophthalmology at Georgetown University Medical Center and a fellowship in Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus at Children's National Medical Center, both in Washington, DC. His fellowship in Pediatric Ophthalmology was completed in 1990 under Marshall M. Parks, a master clinician and surgeon known by many as the “Father of Pediatric Ophthalmology.” Following a year as Chief Resident in Ophthalmology at Georgetown University Medical Center, Traboulsi joined the faculty at The Johns Hopkins Hospital, where he served as Associate Professor of Ophthalmology from 1990-1997. He additionally was named as Chairman of the Department of Ophthalmology at The Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center 1995-1997. In 1997, he left Hopkins to join the faculty at Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, as Head of the Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus and Director of the Center for Genetic Eye Diseases, where he has worked since. At Cole Eye Institute, he has devoted a considerable amount of his time to education of residents and fellows. He was Director of the Cole Eye Institute fellowship program in Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus 1997-2009, and has been the Cole Eye Institute Residency Program Director since 2001. He was appointed Director of the Graduate Medical Education and Vice-Chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Education Institute in 2005. Traboulsi has also been a Professor of Ophthalmology at the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University since 2006. Additional prominent positions include: Traboulsi has been recognized and honored throughout the United States and internationally as a prominent contributor to the fields of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Ocular Genetics. He has received over 40 awards and honorary lectureships at prominent academic institutions. Some of his most notable honors include: Traboulsi has authored nearly 400 scientific articles and book chapters. His books Genetic Diseases of the Eye (Oxford Press, First Ed. 1999) and A Compendium of Inherited Disorders and the Eye (Oxford Press, 2005) serve as major references on this topic. He has worked as principal investigator on a number of studies focused on determination and description of the molecular genetics and clinical manifestations of ocular disorders. Traboulsi's most notable scientific contributions include: Traboulsi met his wife, Mayya Massoud Traboulsi in 1975 as sophomore students at the American University of Beirut, Lebanon. They married in 1982, and had two sons, Alexander and Nadeem, born in 1984 and 1989. {{Persondata | NAME = Traboulsi, Elias | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = Lebanese physician| DATE OF BIRTH = May 19, 1957 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
