 Administered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB), the Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC) Program is a national initiative designed to reduce child and youth disability and death due to severe illness or injury. Established in 1984, the Program’s purpose is to raise awareness about the importance of providing emergency medical care to children that corresponds to their physiological and psychological development. The Program targets primary and acute healthcare professionals, emergency medical services (EMS) and trauma system providers and planners, and the general public. Although the EMSC Program began 25 years ago, the larger emergency care system of which it is a part dates back to the Korean and Vietnam Wars. Medical experiences in both conflicts demonstrated that survival rates improve dramatically when patients are stabilized in the field and transported immediately to a well-equipped emergency facility. During the 1960s, civilian medical and surgical communities began to recognize the possibilities in applying these experiences within an organized EMS system. Support for EMSC. In 1973, Congress passed the Emergency Medical Services Systems Act of 1973, establishing a program managed by HRSA to provide additional resources to state and local governments for implementing comprehensive EMS systems. Between 1975 and 1979, state EMS systems dramatically improved the outcomes for adults—however, pediatric surgeons, pediatricians, and other concerned groups began to recognize that children’s outcomes did not keep pace. In 1979, Calvin C.J. Sia, MD, then-president of the Hawaii Medical Association, urged members of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) to develop multifaceted EMS programs designed to decrease disability and death in children. Soon after, Senator Daniel Inouye (D-HI) joined Dr. Sia’s crusade after learning about the care provided to the daughter of one of his senior staff members. Her treatment demonstrated the average emergency department’s shortcomings in treating a child in crisis. Senators Orrin Hatch (R-UT) and Lowell Weicker (R-CT), backed by other staff members with similar disturbing experiences, joined Sen. Inouye in sponsoring legislation to create the EMSC Program. In 1984, the U.S. Congress enacted legislation (Public Law 98-555) authorizing the use of federal funds for EMSC. Administered by MCHB, the EMSC Program provides states grant money to help develop and “institutionalize” emergency medical services for critically ill and injured children. The Program does not promote the development of a separate EMS system for children, but rather seeks to enhance the pediatric capability of existing EMS systems. One year later, Congress appropriated initial funds for EMSC and the first program grant announcements were published. In 1986, EMSC awarded the first federal grants specifically earmarked to improve pediatric emergency medical services to Alabama, California, New York, and Oregon. The federal EMSC Program is designed to ensure that all children and adolescents—no matter where they live, attend school, or travel—receive appropriate care in a health emergency. Since its establishment, the EMSC Program has provided grant funding to all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and five U.S. territories. Additional EMSC Program funding has been used to establish national resource centers and to support the infrastructure for a pediatric emergency care research network (Ball et al.). Grants and cooperative agreements funded by the program include the following: {| class="wikitable"|-! Grants and Cooperative Agreements Funded by EMSC! Description|-| State Partnership (SP) Grants| State Partnership grants fund activities to improve and integrate pediatric emergency care in a State EMS System. The typical applicant is a State government unless the State decides to delegate responsibility to an accredited school of medicine. Every grantee is required to collect and report data on program-defined performance measures. |-| Targeted Issue (TI) Grants| Targeted issue grants are intended to address specific needs, concerns, or topics in pediatric emergency care that transcend state boundaries. Grantees are typically schools of medicine looking to find new approaches to providing the best possible emergency care for children across the nation. Typically, the projects result in new products or resources, or demonstrate the effectiveness of model system component(s) or service(s) of value. |-| State Partnership Regionalization of Care (SPROC) Grants| The purpose of the SPROC grants is two-fold: (1) to continue its work with state governments and/or accredited schools of medicine to develop regionalized systems that encompass the sharing of resources and improve access to pediatric health care services for children and families in tribal, territorial, insular, and rural ares of the United States and (2) to develop "Models of Inclusive Care" that may be replicated in other regions where access to specialized pediatric medical treatment is limited due to geographical distances or jurisdictional borders. |-| Network Development Demonstration Project (NDDP) Cooperative Agreements| NDDP cooperative agreements demonstrate the value of an infrastructure or network that conducts multi-center investigations on the efficacy of treatment, transport, and care responses for children, including those preceding the arrival of children to hospital emergency departments. The Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) currently consists of four NDDP cooperative agreements awarded to academic medical centers. |-| Central Data Management Coordinating Center (CDMCC)| Following the inception of the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN), a cooperative agreement was awarded to the University of Utah to serve as the Network's Central Data Management and Coordinating Center. The Center provides a central repository for data generated by each of the PECARN research sites, or nodes, and their hospital affiliates. The CDMCC also works with PECARN principal investigators to implement PECARN-wide standards for data collection and analysis in order to ensure uniformity and quality of the data and to monitor the safety and timely progress of PECARN studies.|-| National EMSC Data Analysis Resource Center (NEDARC)| Funded through a cooperative agreement, NEDARC provides technical assistance to EMSC grantees and state EMS offices in the areas of data collection, data analysis, data communication, quality improvement, grant writing, and research design. |-| EMSC National Resource Center (EMSC-NRC)| Also funded through a cooperative agreement, the EMSC-NRC provides support to EMSC federal project officers and EMSC grantees.|} To measure the effectiveness of federal grant programs, HRSA requires grantees to report on specific performance measures related to their grant funded activities. The measures are part of the Government Performance Results Act (GPRA). In order to receive or continue to receive Program funds, all EMSC grantees must measure: Maintaining Partnerships with National and Professional Organizations. The Program works with a variety of national and professional organizations to identify and address the key issues affecting EMS, including but not limited to: managed care, disaster preparedness, children with special healthcare needs, mental health, family-centered care, and cultural diversity. The Program develops national task forces and publishes comprehensive reports drawing attention to many of these critical issues. Past examples of such collaborative work include the following: (1) The American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma, the National Association of EMS Physicians, the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), and the EMSC Partnership for Children Stakeholder Group collaborated to revise the recommended equipment list for ambulances in the United States. This revised document will be used to evaluate the availability of pediatric equipment and supplies for Basic Life Support and Advanced Life Support patient care units. (2) Duke University and the AAP convened a multidisciplinary panel of experts to discuss recommendations to improve pediatric medication safety in the emergency department. (3) The AAP, ACEP, and the Emergency Nurses Association work together to release the joint policy statement Guidelines for Care of Children in the Emergency Department. (4) In partnership with the The George Washington University School of Public Health and Health Services Department of Health Policy, the NRC published the issue brief “The Application of the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) to Hospital Inpatients". The issue brief provides a brief overview of the Emergency Medical Treat¬ment and Labor Act (EMTALA) and focuses on its application to hospital inpatients. (5) In collaboration with the Federal Interagency Committee on EMS, the NRC conducted a Gap Analysis of EMS Related Research. This project, which involved a review of more than 270 articles, mapped existing literature to priorities described in national research agendas as a mechanism for assisting with the process of making informed decisions regarding policy and funding priorities. Collaborating with Federal Organizations. The Program works with numerous federal agencies to improve the quality and quantity of EMSC research, to foster interagency collaboration in highlighting EMSC research topics within research agendas, and to reduce barriers impeding the production of high-quality EMSC research. The Center also collaborates with the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN), the first federally funded pediatric emergency medicine research network. Working with Healthcare Providers: Training and Education. The Program addresses contemporary pediatric emergency care issues such as Family Presence in the Emergency Department and Pediatric Disaster Planning and Preparedness from healthcare providers' perspective through the development of online training programs. 
