 It has been scientifically proven that the human fetus is relatively susceptible to impact from adverse conditions within the mother's environment. Sub-par fetal conditions often cause various degrees of developmental delays, both physical and mental, for the growing baby. Although some variables do occur as a result of genetic conditions pertaining to the father, a great many are directly brought about from environmental toxins that the mother is exposed to. Historically, it was recognized that certain substances that were harmful to the pregnant woman were often as harmful, if not more harmful, to the fetus as well. In the last century evidence has emerged that even environmental exposures that are not overtly harmful to the mother herself could cause serious harm to the developingfetus. Substances that caused birth defects and other adverse effects to the fetus, in the absence of recognized toxicity to mothers, were: the estrogenic hormone diethylstilbestrol (often taken by mothers during pregnancy and found to cause genital abnormalities); thalidomide (taken to control nausea during pregnancy and found to cause limb abnormalities); and methylmercury (a neurotoxin found in contaminated fish. In addition, more recent research has shown evidence of the adverseeffects associated with the consumption of ethanol during pregnancy. More recently, maternal tobacco smoking and even environmental tobacco smoke, modest consumption of ethanol during pregnancy, and low levels of exposure to lead and mercury have been found to be have adverse impacts on fetal growth and development. Fetal development takes place while a fetus is in the mother's womb. There are three trimesters, the germinal period, the embryonic period, and the fetal period, where there are different changes occurring to the fetus and to the mother. Some examples of what takes place in the first trimester are that the placenta grows, different body parts grow, and the central nervous system forms. During the second trimester, a fetus' hair grows, the fetus starts sucking their thumb and the fetus' senses develop. By the third trimester, the fetus' body temperature becomes normal and the fetus begins to digest and excrete waste. The prenatal environment is highly susceptible to toxicities found in the mother’s world. Recent research indicates that anywhere from one thousand to three thousand new chemicals have been introduced into the environment every year for over twenty years. These chemicals all have the potential to cause significant damage to a developing fetus, should they be introduced into the neonatal environment. Although the majority of these chemicals are known to cause illness in individuals of any age ( such as cigarette smoke, carbon monoxide, or lead) some are found in everyday items and supplies that one would not think twice about having around the house. In fact, many such items as lipstick, fragrant shampoo, and plastic food containers all have the potential to contain harmful chemicals that can cause serious obstacles for fetal development. In fact, studies have shown certain brands of lipstick and other cosmetic products to contain a toxic chemical known as ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate, an endocrine disrupter which causes interference with the body's ability to make and secrete chemicals important for proper growth and development. When unknowing mothers accidentally ingest this makeup it is transferred into the neonatal environment where it can directly impair fetal growth. Despite policies put in place for the specific purpose of regulating chemicals currently on the market, safety data only exists for about fifteen percent of newly discovered chemicals, leaving tens of thousands of older chemicals unregulated and unrecorded. When such unregulated chemicals find their way into the fetal environment, they have a variety of adverse effects on development and future functioning. When the human fetus experiences negative effects while in the prenatal environment, it is said to have experienced a "developmental toxicity". Developmental toxicities can result in structural abnormalities, altered growth, functional deficiencies, congenital neoplasia, or even death for the fetus. One in ten US babies is born preterm and about 5% have low birth weight. Preterm birth, defined as birth at less than 37 weeks of gestation, is a major basis of infant mortality throughout childhood. Exposures to environmental toxins such as lead, tobacco smoke, and DDT have been linked with an increased risk for spontaneous abortion, low birth weight, or preterm birth. Perhaps one of the most crucial components of the developmental process is the placenta. The placenta is a semipermeable membrane that allows certain substances to travel through to the fetus. The placenta is crucial to the well-being of the fetus, for it is the organ that mediates the exchange of blood and nutrients from the mother. The primary functions of the placenta are to transport nutrients, oxygen, immunoglobulins, and hormones to the fetus, facilitate the elimination of waste products, perform endocrine functions, and prevent the mother's immune system from attacking the fetus. The healthy placenta does form a barrier for most pathogens and for certain xenobiotic substances. However, it is by design an imperfect barrier since it must transport substances required for growth and development. Placental transport can be by passive diffusion for smaller molecules that are lipid soluble orby active transport for substances that are larger and/or electrically charged. Some toxic chemicals may be actively transported. The dose of a substance received by the fetus is determined by the amount of the substance transported across the placenta as well as the rate of metabolismand elimination of the substance. As the fetus has an immature metabolism, it is unable to detoxify substances very efficiently; and as the placenta plays such an important role in substance exchange between the mother and the fetus, it goes without saying that any toxic substances that the mother is exposed to are transported to thefetus, where they can then affect development. Carbon-dioxide, lead, ethanol (alcohol), and cigarette smoke in particular are all substances that have a high likelihood of placental transferal. Identifying potential hazards for fetal development requires a basis of scientific information. In 2004, Brent proposed a set of criteria for identifying causes of congenital malformations that also are applicable to developmental toxicity in general. Those criteria are: As previously mentioned, conditions the mother is exposed to during pregnancy have the potential to damage to the developing fetus. Even exposure to seemingly harmless levels of substances can cause toxins to be stored within the mother's body, where they are then transferred to the fetus via the placenta and cause damage to the delicate structures. Substances which have been found to be particularly harmful are lead (which is stored in the mother's bones), cigarette smoke, mercury (a neurological toxicant consumed through fish), carbon dioxide, and ionizing radiation. Factors such as heat and noise have also been found to have significant effects on development. As mentioned, different organs develop at different times throughout the pregnancy. There are critical periods where certain organs can be affected negatively by external factors, like environmental toxins. Environmental toxins are hazardous materials that can do harm if exposed to someone. Examples of environmental toxins can be alcohol, heroine, and cocaine. Not only are drugs environmental toxins but things like lead and waste products can also be environmental toxins. Exposure to these toxins can result in miscarriage and sterility. These toxins can also cause a fetus to develop birth defects, malformations or diseases. Teratogens are substances that can cause malformations to organs and tissues while they are forming during the prenatal period. The consumption of alcohol while pregnant can cause the fetus' central nervous system to become damaged. Tobacco could also affect a fetus. A study from the University of Patras Medical school found that half of the mothers that participated in the study who had children suffering from congenital heart disease were smokers. Cocaine can be absorbed through the placenta and can be seen in urine and hair. These teratogens can cause a baby to be born premature and at a low birth weight. Environmental toxins do not only affect fetuses in physical ways, but they could also affect a fetus psychologically. There has been studies that suggest that environmental toxins are linked to ADHD. There are also other studies that find a correlation between environmental toxins and autism. Though research is still being conducted, scientists believe that up to thirty percent of children born with ADHD are linked to either tobacco smoke exposure prior to birth or lead exposure after birth. For children whose mothers smoked during pregnancy, they were over two times as likely to develop ADHD. However, it is not just smoke, other toxins may also lead to ADHD. For example, take alcohol. Studies have reported brain changes related in both ADHD and prenatal alcohol exposure that show striking similarity, suggesting that prenatal exposure to teratogenic substances may, have a role in deviant brain development in ADHD. According to CNN, a study done showed that mercury is another environmental toxin linked to ADHD. Mercury,in a new study, was reported by researchers that children who are exposed to higher levels of mercury in the womb are more likely to exhibit attention problems, hyperactivity, and other ADHD symptoms. Cigarette smoke – stillbirth, placental disruption, prematurity, lower mean birth weight, physical birth defects (cleft palate etc.), decrements in lung function, increased risk of infant mortality. Carbon dioxide – decreased oxygen delivery to brain, intellectualdeficiencies Lead – miscarriage, low birth weight, neurological delays, anemia,encephalopathy, paralysis, blindness, Mercury – cerebral palsy, limb defects, mental retardation. Ionizing radiation – miscarriage, low birth weight, physical birthdefects, childhood cancers Below is chart that states only a few of the developmental tasks hindered in fetal exposure to enviornmentak toxins. Developmental endpoints vulnerable to environmental disruption Category !! Description and comment Growth Growth in all its manifestations (body size, birth weight and rate of growth) is sensitive to environmental insults. While growth is sensitive, it is not specific to environmental exposures, because many factors influence growth, including Functional abnormality Functional abnormalities, typically identified after birth, may be a consequence of environmental exposure prior to or during pregnancy. Neurodevelopmental impairment resulting from prenatal lead exposures represents an example. Either paternal or maternal lead exposure increases the risk of spontaneous abortion and impairs fetal growth and postnatal neurodevelopment. Because maternal bone lead is mobilized during pregnancy, exposures producing abnormal fetal development may have occurred many years prior to the pregnancy. Other functional abnormalities are included in the emerging literature on developmental origins of health and disease. Structural abnormality Traditional concern about exposures in pregnancy has focused on birth defects or structural abnormalities. There are ∼50 chemicals, ∼15 infectious agents and several physical agents known to produce human structural malformations. Death A common developmental consequence of a chromosomal or genetic abnormality is embryonic, fetal or neonatal death. There are data suggesting an association between certain paternal occupations and increased risk of mortality. Additionally, there are data linking a variety of environmental exposures with embryonic, fetal and neonatal mortality. Gestational length Prematurity has not been a traditional developmental endpoint, however, given the increasing evidence that it is susceptible to environmental exposures, the life-long consequences of prematurity, and the persistence of prematurity as a public health problem it will also be considered as an endpoint of abnormal development in this review. One particular substance of recent concern is dioxin. Dioxin is a toxic chlorine based compound that can be found everywhere in the environment. Originally a byproduct of the incineration of chlorine-based chemicals (usually duringmanufacturing), dioxin falls to earth from factory smoke stacks, where it is consumed by various animals. When intoxicated animals are consumed by expecting mothers, the chemical is released into their system, where it then transfers to the fetus. Dioxin exposure during fetal development has been found to cause increases in several different types of cancer, reproductive dysfunction, growth problems, and thwarted cell growth. Further research is still being conducted to investigate the full repercussions of prenatal dioxin exposure. Air pollution represents another source of detriment to growth and development. Compounds such as carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide all have the potential to cause serious damage when inhaled by an expecting mother. Low birth weight, preterm birth, intra-uterine growth retardation, and congenital abnormalities have all been found to be associated with fetal exposure to air pollution. Although pollution can be found virtually everywhere, there are specific sources that have been known to release toxic substances and should be avoided if possible by those who wish to remain relatively free of toxicants. These substances include, but are not limited to: steel mills, waste/water treatment plants, sewage incinerators, automotive fabrication plants, oil refineries, and chemical manufacturing plants.Expecting mothers should make efforts to avoid exposure to air pollution at all costs. Federal agencies do their best to regulate air pollution for everyone-not just the sake of the unborn children. Sometimes, despite their best efforts, air pollution cannot be fully controlled. For example, in Los Angeles, regulations have been made to control pollution, by putting strict rules on industrial and vehicle emmisions. Improvements have been made to meet these regulations.Despite these improvements, this region still does not meet federal standards for ozone and particulate matter. Approximately 150,000 births occur every year in Los Angeles. Thus, any effects air pollution has on human development in utero,is of great concern to those who live in this region. Below is a chart that shows air pollution and it's effect during different stages of fetal development A final area of concern to those wishing to avoid prenatal exposure totoxicants would be pesticides. Created for the specific purpose ofcausing harm (to insects, rodents, and other pests), pesticides havethe potential to serious damages to a developing fetus, should they beintroduced into the fetal environment. Studies have shown thatpesticides, particularly fungicides, have shown up in analyses ofinfant's cord blood, proving that such toxins are indeed transferredinto the baby's body. Overall, the twopesticides most frequently detected in cord blood are diethyltolaumide( a commonly used repellant) and vinclozolin (a fungicide). Although pesticide toxicity is not as frequentlymentioned as some of the other methods of environmental toxicity, suchas air pollution, contamination can occur at any time from merelyengaging in everyday activities such as walking down a pathway near acontaminated area, or eating foods that have not been washed properly. In 2007 alone, 1.1 billion pounds ofpesticides were found present in the environment, causing pesticideexposure to gain notoriety as a new cause of caution to those wishingto preserve their health and that of the unborn. Even small doses of toxins can have detrimental effects on unborn children. In a study done at Tufts University, Laura Vandenberg concluded that health effects “are remarkably common” when people are exposed to low doses of toxins. One example she gave was bisphenol A, found in polycarbonate plastic, canned foods and paper receipts. After the experiments, Vendenberg and her colleauges stated that their research, “clearly indicates that low doses cannot be ignored.” They cited evidence of a wide range of health effects not only fetuses, but adults too, including links to infertility, cardiovascular disease, obesity, cancer and other disorders. As there are a variety of substances that can prove harmful to a developing fetus, it is crucial that individuals who are expecting take extra precautions to limit exposure to toxicity. Although it is impossible to completely avoid all sources of contamination, by being careful and conscious of one's surroundings, it is possible to significantly decrease harmful exposure. Research is still being conducted on various substances to discover the full extent of teratogens that are found in the environment and around everyday communities. 
