 Eric Esrailian, M.D., M.P.H., is an American gastroenterologist who serves on the full-time faculty of the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles. He has been an appointed member of the Medical Board of California. He also active in charity and community service activities in Los Angeles. He completed his undergraduate education at University of California, Berkeley. He then graduated from the Loma Linda University School of Medicine. He completed a residency in internal medicine at the University of Southern California. He completed his gastroenterology fellowship at UCLA, where he also obtained a Masters of Public Health degree. He is also a graduate of the Executive Program in Management from the UCLA Anderson School of Management. Esrailian is a full-time faculty member at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. He is described as having patient care, teaching, and administrative positions. His research publications primarily involve irritable bowel syndrome. He has often been quoted in media reports about patient education topics. He was appointed by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger to the Medical Board of California and served from 2010-2011. Besides being involved in philanthropic projects for UCLA itself, Esrailian is on the Board of Directors of a college access organization called the Fulfillment Fund. He is listed as having involvement with organizing multiple charity events, such as "Stars," for the organization to raise money for educational support for disadvantaged students in Los Angeles. In 2009, he started the "Dream" benefit concert series together with friends in the entertainment industry. He joined the Board of Directors of the Hammer Museum in 2012. Esrailian was one of Farrah Fawcett's physicians and was the one she contacted when she believed her private medical records had been leaked to the press. He appeared in "Farrah's Story," the 2009 documentary about her. Esrailian gave a eulogy at the funeral for Georgia Frontiere and has a statement posted on the team website. {{Persondata | NAME = Esrailian, Eric | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
