 The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) is one of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and part of the United States Department of Health and Human Services. It funds and conducts research on topics related to the health of children, adults, families, and populations. Some research topics include: At the request of President John F. Kennedy, the U.S. Congress established the NICHD in 1962. President Kennedy's sister, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, had been an advocate for those with intellectual and developmental disabilities with help from the family pediatrician Robert E. Cooke, pushed for research that focused on disorders pertaining to human development. In 1961 Dr. Cooke chaired a task-force on child health and growth; the task-force's report was given to congress, which then established the NICHD the following year. The Institute was renamed after Shriver by Congress in December, 2007. <blockquote>The mission of the NICHD is to ensure that every person is born healthy and wanted, that women suffer no harmful effects from reproductive processes, and that all children have the chance to achieve their full potential for healthy and productive lives, free from disease or disability, and to ensure the health, productivity, independence, and well-being of all people through optimal rehabilitation.</blockquote> In 2006, the NICHD issued US $903 million in grants and spent US$359 million on direct operations, which includes intramural research conducted on NIH campuses. As of July 2012, the director of the NICHD is Alan E. Guttmacher, M.D., who has held this position since 2010. The NICHD supports extramural research at research institutions,universities, and other organizations and conducts research through its intramural research program on the NIH campus, in Bethesda, Maryland and at other affiliated facilities. The DIR is closely concerned with the biological, neurobiological, and medical aspects of normal and abnormal human development. The DIR is divided into basic research, which is more laboratory oriented (many labs use animal models) and clinical research, which involves human patients. DIR Basic Research DIR Clinical Research On the 17 October 2011, the OIG published its results from an audit of a contract between the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and Westat, Inc., which read in part: 
