 External urine collection devices are a type of medical product used, primarily by men, to manage urinary output and/or urinary incontinence. These devices attached to the outside of the male anatomy and direct urine into a separate collection chamber such as a leg or bedside bag. There are several varieties of external urine collection devices on the market today including Texas or condom catheters, urinals and hydrocolloid based devices. External products should not be used by any individual who experiences urinary retention without overflow incontinence. Texas or Condom catheters are made of silicone or latex (depending on the brand/manufacturer) and cover the penis just like a condom. It is attached to a drain at the bottom of the catheter which has tubing leading to a leg or bedside bag. Texas catheters are designed to be worn 24/7 and changed daily. Texas catheters come in several sizes to accommodate anatomical variation. Texas catheters are not appropriate for men who have retracted anatomy or are uncircumcised. Texas catheter users may experience a range of potential complications. These complications can increase in severity and frequency with long term use. Up to 40% of condom catheter users will develop a urinary tract infection with long term use. Additionally, 15% of long term users will develop skin injuries including: inflammation, ulceration, necrosis, gangrene and constriction of the penis. Additionally, sizing can prove difficult for some men, leading to dislodgement of the catheter and urine spillage during voiding (commonly referred to as pop-offs or blow-offs). Additionally, 1.3% of condom catheter users will develop a bladder or renal stone requiring medical treatment. Urinals are a class of device which does not attach to the body. Instead, these external collection systems can be placed against the urinary opening during voiding and removed once voiding is complete. These are commonly used by hunters and sportsmen who may spend long periods away from a bathroom. These are not appropriate for men with urinary retention or who experience involuntary urine leakage. 
