 An eye care professional is an individual who provides a service related to the eyes or vision. It is a general term that can refer to any healthcare worker involved in eye care, from one with a small amount of post-secondary training to practitioners with a doctoral level of education. Another important difference between the types of oculists is that while optometrists may obtain their doctorate by graduating at a special school in which they are trained to be optometrists, ophthalmologists are medical doctors who need to graduate from medical school and many years of internships in order to be able to get their degree. Moreover, because of their more advanced background in the study of eye care, ophthalmologists may proceed in their studying in this field and specializing in domains such as pediatric ophthalmology, corneal disease or ocular oncology. This is the reason why ophthalmologists are often classified as surgeons rather than doctors. The term "oculist" was therefore used to describe these two professions as a result of the similarities that exist between the two. Firstly, both ophthalmologists and optometrists receive the appropriate training which will help them in detecting the vision related problems and to diagnose and treat certain eye conditions. Vision therapists typically rely on prisms, eye patches, filtered lenses, and computerized systems to conduct therapy sessions. Most eye care professionals do not practice iridology, citing a significant lack of scientific evidence for the practice. The American Academy of Ophthalmology describes an ophthalmologist as follows: <blockquote>A medical doctor who specializes in all aspects of eye care including diagnosis, management, and surgery of ocular diseases and disorders. An optometrist is defined by the World Council of Optometry (a member of the World Health Organisation) as follows: <blockquote>Optometry is a healthcare profession that is autonomous, educated, and regulated (licensed/registered), and optometrists are the primary healthcare practitioners of the eye and visual system who provide comprehensive eye and vision care, which includes refraction and dispensing, detection and treatment of disease in the eye, and the rehabilitation of conditions of the visual system.</blockquote> The World Health Organization defines the eyecare work of an orthoptist as: <blockquote>The study and treatment of defects in binocular vision resulting from defects in the optic musculature or of faulty visual habits. It involves a technique of eye exercises designed to correct the visual axes of eyes not properly coordinated for binocular vision. In a gross oversimplification, it can be said that ophthalmologists treat eye diseases while optometrists treat vision. This allows for considerable overlap in care because most eye diseases affect vision, and many problems with vision are signs of disease. Laws regarding licensure vary by location, but typically ophthalmologists are licensed to provide the same care as an optometrist, with the addition of surgical options. In most locations surgery is the biggest difference between the two professions. Optometrists frequently refer patients to ophthalmologists when the condition requires surgery or intraocular injection. Historically, ophthalmology has developed as a specialization of medical doctors while optometry originated as a profession that fitted people with glasses. As of 2012, this difference has decreased as the majority of optometrists screen for and treat eye disease and many ophthalmologists fit people with corrective lenses. This difference in background previously caused some conflict between the two professions. Ophthalmologists have voiced concern that an optometrist's educational background is different from their own. Optometrists have criticized ophthalmologists of caring for the health structure of the eye while letting other vision disorders go untreated. For example, consider a patient with glaucoma and spasm of accommodation. Ophthalmologists would be concerned that an optometrist would fail to identify or otherwise mistreat the glaucoma. Optometrist would worry that the ophthalmologist would fail to identify or mistreat the spasm of accommodation. As of 2012, both these concerns are invalid because the education of both types of professionals prepares them to handle both conditions. (This may not be true outside of the United States.) Because of cooperation between optometrists and ophthalmologists, the quality of care depends more on the abilities of the individual doctors than it does what type of professional they are. Orthoptists specialize in the diagnosis and management of problems with eye movement and coordination, such as misalignment of the visual axis, binocular vision problems, and pre/post surgical care of strabismus patients. They do not directly treat ocular disease with medications or surgery. Orthoptists treat patients using optical aids and eye exercises and primarily work alongside doctors to co-manage binocular vision treatment, but also often do eye and vision testing. All three types of professional perform screenings for common ocular problems affecting children (such as amblyopia and strabismus) and adults (such as cataracts, glaucoma, and diabetic retinopathy). All are required to participate in ongoing continuing education courses to maintain licensure and stay current on the latest standards of care. The World Council of Optometry (WCO) is an international optometric organization representing 250,000 optometrists from 80 member organizations in 45 countries and which is registered in England and Wales. It is also the only such organization that maintains official relations with the World Health Organization and it is one of the members of the International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness. ECOO is an organisation that represents optometrists and opticians across Europe with over over thirty countries represented. ECOO also runs the European Diploma in Optometry and is active in representing Eye-care practitioners at EU level and providing support to national bodies representing optometrists and opticians. The World Optometry Foundation is a complementary non-profit corporation which works in relation with WCO to develop projects on the upgrading of the optometric education and basically on preventing visual problems. The International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness was established in 1975. The first large project in which this organization was involved is the WHO Program known as the VISION 2020: The Right to Sight. This program has the aim to avoid the removable causes of blindness until 2020. The headquarters are in United Kingdom, but the organization has offices widely spread around the world, in big cities of all the continents. 
