 Every year, many older people suffer from falls. These falls in older adults are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality, and can have a serious effect on the person who falls. Falls can be caused by many things, and often the cause is multi-factorial, and require a multi-disciplinary approach to treat any injuries sustained during the fall, and to prevent any future falls. The medical definition of a fall in the nonhospitalized geriatric population According to Tinetti, Speechley, and Ginter, is “an event which results in a person coming to rest unintentionally on the ground or lower level, not as a result of a major intrinsic event (such as a stroke) or overwhelming hazard.” Other definitions are more inclusive and do not exclude "major intrinsic events" as a fall. Falls are one of the giants of geriatric medicine. Every year, the following proportion of people suffer from a fall: >65 years >75 years Institutional Care Recurrent Fallers Healthy Elderly 28-35% 32-45% >50% 60-70% 15% Falls are the commonest presenting complaint to A&E; in patients over the age of 65. Falls are often caused by a number of factors. The faller may live with many risk factors for falling and only have problems when another factor appears. As such, management is often tailored to treating the factor that caused the fall, rather than all of the risk factors a patient has for falling.Risk factors grouped into intrinsic and extrinsic factors. When assessing a patient who has fallen, it is important to try to get an eye-witness account of the incident. As the faller may have had some loss of consciousness, they may not give an accurate description of the fall. However, in practice, these eye-witness accounts are often unavailable. It is also important to remember than 30% of cognitively intact older people are unable to remember a documented fall three months later.Important features to ask about include: It is good practice to exclude anaemia, renal failure, and electrolyte imbalance, and to perform an ECG and a chest x-ray. Other tests should be tailored to the cause of the fall. A large body of evidence shows that a multi-disciplinary approach to assessment and treatment results in the best outcome. Possible interventions include: A fall occurs when a person's center of pressure (COP) goes outside of the base of support. A majority of research on postural instability has focused on the anterior/posterior directions due to the structure of the legs and the frequency of falls in those directions. Maki, Holliday, & Topper (1994) has stated that sway in the medial/lateral directions can be just as important, “Results show strong evidence linking deficits in postural balance related to the control of the m-l stability with an increased risk of falling”. The mechanisms of postural instability are not fully understood, but research has suggested that disorders affecting sensory input and efferent motor signals are the primary causes. Furthermore, a recent systematic review has demonstrated that performing dual-task tests (for example, combining a walking task with a counting task) may help in predicting which people are at an increased risk of a fall. 
