 Female genital mutilation (FGM), also known as female genital cutting (FGC) and female circumcision (FC), is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as "all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons." According to the WHO, it is practiced mainly in 28 countries in western, eastern, and north-eastern Africa, and in parts of Asia and the Middle East. Female genital mutilation is believed to have originated in the Pharaonic period amongst Afro-Asiatic (Hamito-Semitic) communities inhabiting the Red Sea area, from where it later spread to other regions. It is typically carried out on girls between four years old and puberty, although it is also conducted on younger infants and on adults. It may take place in a hospital, but is usually performed, without anaesthesia, by a traditional circumciser using a knife, razor or scissors. The WHO has offered four classifications of FGM, Types I–IV. According to the WHO, the practice is rooted in gender inequality and ideas about the need to control women and their sexuality; in communities that practice it, it is typically supported by both women and men. The procedures known as FGM were referred to as female circumcision (FM) until the early 1980s, when the term female genital mutilation came into use. That term was adopted at the third conference of the Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and in 1991 the WHO recommended its use to the United Nations. It has since become the dominant term within the international community and in medical literature. Alexia Lewnes argued in a 2005 report for UNICEF that the word mutilation differentiates the procedure from male circumcision and stresses its severity. Medical or elective procedures such as labiaplasty and vaginoplasty, or those used in sex reassignment surgery, are not regarded as examples of FGM. According to the WHO, some elective practices in countries that have outlawed FGM do fall under the category of Type IV FGM (see below), but the WHO decided to maintain its broad definition to avoid loopholes that could allow FGM to continue. Other terms in use include female genital cutting (FGC), female genital surgeries, female genital alteration, female genital excision, and female genital modification. Local terms for the procedure include tahara in Egypt; tahur in Sudan; and bolokoli in Mali, which Anika Rahman and Nahid Toubia write are words synonymous with purification. Several countries refer to Type 1 FGM as sunna circumcision. It is also known as kakia, and in Sierra Leone as bundu, after the Bundu secret society. Female genital mutilation in Africa and the Arabian Peninsula is believed to have its origins in ancient cultural ceremonies performed by Afro-Asiatic (Hamito-Semitic) communities inhabiting the Red Sea area. Cultural transmission and migrations from this core region subsequently introduced the custom to other populations, from where it again dispersed. The term "pharaonic circumcision" (Type III) stems from its practice in Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs, and "fibula" (in "infibulation") refers to the Roman practice of piercing the outer labia with a fibula, or brooch. Leonard Kouba and Judith Muasher write that genitally mutilated females have been found among Egyptian mummies, and that Herodotus (c. 484 BCE – c. 425 BCE) referred to the practice when he visited Egypt. There is reference on a Greek papyrus from 163 BCE to the procedure being conducted on girls in Memphis, the ancient Egyptian capital. After having visited Ethiopia in the second century BCE, during the reign of the Kingdom of Aksum, the Greek historian Agatharchides likewise asserted that the kindred people he encountered there already circumcised their women in the Egyptian tradition. Another Greek geographer, Strabo (c. 64 BCE – c. 23 CE), later reported having also witnessed the practice when he traveled to Egypt in 25 BCE. On this basis, Asim Zaki Mustafa argues that the common attribution of the procedure to Islam is unfair because it is a much older phenomenon. Islamic scholars have said that, while male circumcision is a sunna, or religious obligation, FGM is not, and several have issued a fatwa against Type III FGM. Judaism requires circumcision for boys, but does not allow it for girls. Gynaecologists in England and the United States in the 19th century would remove the clitoris to treat insanity, masturbation and nymphomania. The first reported clitoridectomy in the West was carried out in 1822 by a surgeon in Berlin on a teenage girl regarded as an "imbecile" who was masturbating. Reasons for practicing FGM vary. Generally, it is considered by its practitioners to be an essential part of raising a girl properly. In some societies, circumcision is also performed to clearly differentiate between the genders on the belief that the clitoris of a girl confers upon her masculinity and the foreskin of a boy makes him feminine. According to the WHO, the procedure ensures pre-marital virginity and inhibits extra-marital sex, because it reduces women's libido. Women fear the pain of re-opening the vagina, and are afraid of being discovered if it is opened illicitly. In Northeast Africa FGM is encouraged by women in the community, and is primarily intended to deter promiscuity and to offer protection from assault. Sudanese surgeon Nahid Toubia – president of RAINBO (Research, Action and Information Network for the Bodily Integrity of Women) – said in 2002 that campaigning against FGM involved trying to change women's consciousness: "By allowing your genitals to be removed [it is perceived that] you are heightened to another level of pure motherhood – a motherhood not tainted by sexuality and that is why the woman gives it away to become the matron, respected by everyone. By taking on this practice, which is a woman's domain, it actually empowers them. It is much more difficult to convince the women to give it up, than to convince the men." Nilotic and Bantu groups in the African Great Lakes region have through interaction adopted various customs from neighboring Afro-Asiatic populations, including in some communities the practise of female and male circumcision. Elizabeth Heger Boyle writes that the Masai Nilotes of Tanzania will not call a woman "mother" when she has children if she is uncircumcised. According to Amnesty, in certain societies women who have not had the procedure are regarded as too unclean to handle food and water, and there is a belief that a woman's genitals might continue to grow without FGM, until they dangle between her legs. Some groups see the clitoris as dangerous, capable of killing a man if his penis touches it, or a baby if the head comes into contact with it during birth. The age at which the procedure is performed varies. Comfort Momoh, a specialist midwife in England, writes that in Ethiopia the Falashas perform it when the child is a few days old, the Amhara on the eighth day of birth, while the Adere and Oromo choose between four years and puberty. In Somalia it is done between four and nine years. Other communities may wait until adulthood, she writes, either just before marriage or just after the first pregnancy. It may be carried out on one girl alone, or on a group of girls at the same time. The procedure is generally performed by a traditional circumciser, usually an older woman known as a "gedda," without anaesthesia or sterile equipment, though richer families may pay instead for the services of a nurse, midwife, or doctor using a local anaesthetic. It may also be performed by the mother or grandmother, or in some countries – such as Nigeria and Egypt – by the local male barber. The WHO divides FGM into four categories (see image below right for types I–III). Around 85 percent of women experience Types I and II, and 15 percent Type III. Martha Nussbaum writes that Type III accounts for 80–90 percent of all such procedures in countries such as Sudan, Somalia, and Dijbouti. Type I is the removal of the clitoral hood (Type Ia); or the partial or total removal of the clitoris, a clitoridectomy (Type Ib). Type II, often called excision, is partial or total removal of the clitoris and the inner labia or outer labia. Type IIa is removal of the inner labia only; Type IIb, partial or total removal of the clitoris and the inner labia; and Type IIc, partial or total removal of the clitoris, and the inner and outer labia. Type III, commonly called infibulation or pharaonic circumcision, is the removal of all external genitalia. The inner and outer labia are cut away, with or without excision of the clitoris. The girl's legs are then tied together from hip to ankle for up to 40 days to allow the wound to heal. The immobility causes the labial tissue to bond, forming a wall of flesh and skin across the entire vulva, apart from a hole the size of a matchstick for the passage of urine and menstrual blood, which is created by inserting a twig or rock salt into the wound. The vulva is cut open for sexual intercourse and childbirth. Momoh writes that, in some communities, when a pregnant woman who has not experienced FGM goes into labour, the procedure is performed before she gives birth, because it is believed the baby may be stillborn if it touches her clitoris. The risk of haemorrhage and death from FGM during labour is high, she writes. During three six-month studies in the 1980s, Hanny Lightfoot-Klein interviewed 300 Sudanese women and 100 Sudanese men, and described the penetration by the men of their wives' infibulation (Type III): A variety of other procedures are collectively known as Type IV, which the WHO defines as "all other harmful procedures to the female genitalia for non-medical purposes, for example, pricking, piercing, incising, scraping and cauterization." This ranges from ritual nicking of the clitoris – the main practice in Indonesia – to stretching the clitoris or labia, burning or scarring the genitals, or introducing harmful substances into the vagina to tighten it. It also includes hymenotomy, the removal of a hymen regarded as too thick, and gishiri cutting, a practice in which the vagina's anterior wall is cut with a knife to enlarge it. FGM is typically carried out by traditional practitioners, without anaesthesia, using unsterile cutting devices such as knives, razors, scissors, cut glass, sharpened rocks, and fingernails, and applying suturing material such as agave or acacia thorns. FGM has immediate and late complications. Immediate complications are increased when FGM is performed in traditional ways, and without access to medical resources: the procedure is extremely painful and a bleeding complication can be fatal. Other immediate complications include acute urinary retention, urinary infection, wound infection, septicemia, tetanus, and in case of unsterile and reused instruments, hepatitis and HIV. According to Lewnes' UNICEF report, it is unknown how many girls and women die from the procedure because "few records are kept" and fatalities caused by FGM "are rarely reported as such". Momoh writes that the short-term mortality rate is around 10 percent, due to complications such as infection, haemorrhage, and hypovolemic shock. A film shot in Lunsar, Sierra Leone, by Mariana van Zeller in 2007 discusses how girls who bleed excessively are regarded as witches. Late complications may vary depending on the type of FGM performed. The formation of scars and keloids can lead to strictures, obstruction or fistula formation of the urinary and genital tracts. Urinary tract sequalae include damage to urethra and bladder with infections and incontinence. Genital tract sequelae include vaginal and pelvic infections, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and infertility. Complete obstruction of the vagina results in hematocolpos and hematometra. Other complications include epidermoid cysts that may become infected, neuroma formation, typically involving nerves that supplied the clitoris, and pelvic pain. FGM may complicate pregnancy and place women at higher risk for obstetrical problems, which are more common with the more extensive FGM procedures. Thus, in women with Type III FGM who have developed vesicovaginal or rectovaginal fistulae – holes that allows urine and feces to seep into the vagina – it is difficult to obtain clear urine samples as part of prenatal care making the diagnosis of certain conditions harder, such as preeclampsia. Cervical evaluation during labour may be impeded, and labour prolonged. Third-degree laceration, anal sphincter damage, and emergency caesarean section are more common in FGM women than in controls. Neonatal mortality is increased in women with FGM. The WHO estimated that an additional 10–20 babies die per 1,000 deliveries as a result of FGM; the estimate was based on a 2006 study conducted on 28,393 women attending delivery wards at 28 obstetric centers in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal and Sudan. In those settings all types of FGM were found to pose an increased risk of death to the baby: 15 percent higher for Type I, 32 percent for Type II, and 55 percent for Type III. Psychological complications are related to cultural context; damage may occur to women who undergo FGM particularly when they are moving outside their traditional circles and are confronted with a view that mutilation is not the norm. Women with FGM typically report sexual dysfunction and dyspareunia (painful sexual intercourse), but several researchers have written that FGM does not necessarily destroy sexual desire in women. Boyle reported several studies during the 1980s and 1990s where the women said they were able to enjoy sex, though with Type III the risk of sexual dysfunction was higher. Women may request reinfibulation (RI) – the restoration of the infibulation – after giving birth, a contentious issue, with surgeons who perform the procedure regarded as behaving unethically and probably illegally. In Sudan, RI is known as El-Adel (re-circumcision or, literally, "putting right" or "improving"). Two cuts are made around the vagina, then sutures are put in place to tighten it to the size of a pinhole. Vanja Bergrren writes that this in effect mimics virginity. RI may also be carried out just before marriage, after divorce, or even in elderly women to prepare them for death. Defibulation, or deinfibulation, is a surgical technique to reverse the closure of the vaginal opening after a Type III infibulation, and consists of a vertical cut opening up normal access to the vagina. This may be accompanied by removal of scar tissue and labial repair. Procedures have been developed to repair clitoral integrity, such as by Pierre Foldes, a French urologist and surgeon, and Marci Bowers, an American surgeon who studied his work; they used intact clitoral tissue from inside women's bodies to form a new clitoris. According to the WHO, 140 million women and girls are living with the effects of FGM, including 101 million girls over the age of 10 in Africa. The practice persists in 28 African countries, in an area extending westward from Northeast Africa to the Sahel. Caldwell, Orubuloye and Caldwell (2000) write that between 80 and 88 percent of women in Africa who have experienced FGM live in sub-Saharan Africa, 51 percent in West Africa and 27 percent in Nigeria. In Africa most of the girls who undergo the procedure (around two million a year) live in sub-Saharan and north-eastern Africa, according to Plan International. In West Africa, almost all women in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Mali have undergone FGM, mostly Type II; in other West African countries such as Niger and Ghana around 10 percent have. The procedure can be carried out shortly after birth, at puberty, or even when a woman is pregnant for the first time. Reasons for the practice include a mix of cultural, religious and social factors within families and communities, which vary from country to country, and region to region. FGM predates the infiltration of Islam and Christianity in West African cultures. As syncretism occurred, some West Africans argued that the practice was a religious one. This brought on the misconception that FGM is a religious practice, mainly an Islamic one. Although the likelihood of having been circumcised increases with the Muslim population, this does not mean that the entire religion condones the practice, and Muslim leaders have campaigned for its abandonment. Outside Africa, the procedure occurs in northern Saudi Arabia, southern Jordan, northern Iraq (Kurdistan), and possibly Syria, western Iran, and southern Turkey. It is practised in Indonesia, but largely symbolically by pricking the clitoral hood or clitoris until it bleeds. Colonial opposition in Kenya Anika Rahman and Nahid Toubia write that attempts in the early 20th century by colonial administrators to halt FGM succeeded only in provoking local anger. In Kenya, Christian missionaries in the 1920s and 1930s forbade their adherents from practising it – in part because of the medical consequences, but also because the accompanying rituals were seen as highly sexualized – and as a result it became a focal point of the independence movement among the Kikuyu, the country's main ethnic group. Historian Lynn M. Thomas writes that the period 1929–1931 became known in Kenyan historiography as the female circumcision controversy. Protestant missionaries campaigning against it tried to gain support from humanitarian and women's rights groups in London, where the issue was raised in the House of Commons, and in Kenya itself a person's stance toward FGM became a test of loyalty, either to the Christian churches or to the Kikuyu Central Association. Jomo Kenyatta (c. 1894–1978), who became Kenya's first prime minister in 1963, wrote in 1930: Support for the practice also came from the women themselves. E. Mary Holding, a Methodist missionary in Meru, Kenya, wrote in 1942 that the ritual was an entirely female affair, organized by women's councils known as kiama gia ntonye ("the council of entering"). The procedure saw the girls become women, and allowed their mothers to become members of the women's council, a position of authority. Similarly, prohibition strengthened tribal resistance to the British in the 1950s, and increased support for the Mau Mau Uprising (1952–1960). In 1956, under pressure from the British, the council of male elders (the Njuri Nchecke) in Meru, Kenya, announced a ban on clitoridectomy. Over two thousand girls – mostly teenagers, but some as young as eight – were charged over the next three years with having carried out the procedure on each other with razor blades, a practice that came to be known as Ngaitana ("I will circumcise myself"), so-called because the girls claimed to have cut themselves to avoid naming their friends. Sylvia Tamale argues that this was done not only in defiance of the council's cooperation with the colonial authorities, but also in protest against its interference with women's decisions about their own rituals. Since the 1960s In the 1960s and 1970s, Rahman and Nahid Toubia write, doctors in Sudan, Somalia, and Nigeria began to speak out about the health consequences of FGM, and opposition gathered pace during the United Nations Decade for Women (1975–1985). In 1979 the American feminist writer Fran Hosken (1920–2006) presented research about it – The Hosken Report: Genital and Sexual Mutilation of Females – to the first Seminar on Harmful Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children, sponsored by the WHO. Rahman and Toubia write that African women from several countries at the conference led a vote to end the practice. In 1980 and 1982 feminist physicians Nawal El Saadawi and Asma El Dareer wrote about FGM as a dangerous practice intended to control women's sexuality. The decade also saw the framing of FGM – along with other issues in the domestic sphere, such as dowry deaths – as a human rights violation, rather than as a health concern, and this encouraged academic interest, including from feminist legal scholars. In June 1993 the Vienna World Conference on Human Rights agreed that FGM was a violation of human rights. Several African countries have enacted legislation against it, including Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Togo, and Uganda. President Daniel Moi of Kenya issued a decree against it in December 2001. The 2003 Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights of Women in Africa, or the Maputo Protocol, was passed in November 2005, meaning that all African countries are obliged to pass legislation prohibiting FGM. In Egypt, the Health Ministry banned FGM in 2007 despite pressure from some Islamic groups. Two issues in particular forced the government's hand. A 10-year-old girl was photographed undergoing FGM in a barber's shop in Cairo in 1995 and the images were broadcast by CNN; this triggered a ban on the practice everywhere except in hospitals. Then in 2007 12-year-old Badour Shaker died of an overdose of anaesthesia during or after an FGM procedure for which her mother had paid a physician in an illegal clinic the equivalent of $9.00. The Al-Azhar Supreme Council of Islamic Research, the highest religious authority in Egypt, issued a statement that FGM had no basis in core Islamic law, and this enabled the government to outlaw it entirely. Since 2003 the United Nations (UN) has sponsored an International Day of Zero Tolerance to Female Genital Mutilation, held every 6 February. In November 2012, in a resolution sponsored by 110 of the UN's 193 member states, a UN committee called for members to ban the practice of FGG, and the following month the United Nations General Assembly unanimously passed a resolution to that effect. Criticism of the opposition Some of the international opposition to FGM has attracted critics. The Hosken Report, in particular, was criticized for its alleged ethnocentrism, its negative statements about African society, and its insistence on Western intervention. Sylvia Tamale wrote in 2011 that some African feminists interpret traditional practices such as FGM within a post-colonial context that makes opposing them a complex issue. While critical of FGM, they object to what Tamale calls the imperialist infantilization of African women inherent in the idea that FGM is simply a barbaric rejection of enlightenment and modernity. Lynn Thomas writes that the ritual of FGM has been the primary context in some communities in which the women come together. Because they see it as a way of elevating themselves from girlhood to womanhood, and thereby a way of differentiating between each other, Thomas argues that to remove FGM is to remove that opportunity to gain authority. She writes that the "eradicationists" have responded to these criticisms by reaching out to the African communities and strengthening their relationships with local anti-FGM activists. For example, one of the issues that keeps FGM going in some communities is that the practitioners have no other way to earn a living. Organizations working to end it are therefore offering the women training of some kind; teaching them how to become farmers, for example. As a result of immigration, FGM spread to Australia, Canada, Europe, New Zealand, and the United States. As Western governments became more aware of the practice, legislation was passed to make it a criminal offence, though enforcement may be a low priority. Sweden passed legislation in 1982, the first Western country to do so. It is outlawed in Australia and New Zealand, and is a crime under section 268 of the Criminal Code of Canada. In the United States, 19-year-old Fauziya Kasinga, a member of the Tchamba-Kunsuntu tribe of Togo, was granted asylum in 1996 after leaving an arranged marriage to escape FGM; this set a precedent in US immigration law because it was the first time FGM was accepted as a form of persecution. In the United Kingdom, the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985 outlawed the procedure in Britain itself, and the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 and Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005 made it an offence for FGM to be performed anywhere in the world on British citizens or permanent residents. The Times reported in 2009 that there are 500 victims of FGM every year in the UK, but there have been no prosecutions. According to the Foundation for Women's Health, Research and Development (FORWARD) – founded in 1983 by Efua Dorkenoo, a Ghanaian campaigner against FGM – 66,000 women in England and Wales have experienced FGM, with 7,000 girls at risk. Families who have immigrated from practising countries may send their daughters back there to undergo FGM, ostensibly to visit a relative, or may fly in circumcisers, who are known as "house doctors" because they conduct the procedure in people's homes. The Guardian writes that the six-week-long school summer holiday in the UK is the most dangerous time of the year for these girls; it is a convenient time to carry out the procedure because the girls need several weeks to heal before returning to school. 
