 Female infertility refers to infertility in female humans. There is no unanimous definition of female infertility, but NICE guidelines state that: "A woman of reproductive age who has not conceived after 1 year of unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse, in the absence of any known cause of infertility, should be offered further clinical assessment and investigation along with her partner." It is recommended that a consultation with a fertility specialist should be made earlier if the woman is aged 36 years or over, or there is a known clinical cause of infertility or a history of predisposing factors for infertility. Causes or factors of female infertility can basically be classified regarding whether they are acquired or genetic, or strictly by location. Although causes (or factors) of female infertility can be classified as acquired versus genetic, female infertility is usually more or less a combination of nature and nurture. Also, the presence of any single risk factor of female infertility (such as smoking, mentioned further below) does not necessarily cause infertility, and even if a woman is definitely infertile then the infertility cannot definitely be blamed on any single risk factor even if the risk factor is (or has been) present. According to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), Age, Smoking, Sexually Transmitted Infections, and Being Overweight or Underweight can all affect fertility. In broad sense, acquired factors practically include any factor that is not based on a genetic mutation, including any intrauterine exposure to toxins during fetal development, which may present as infertility many years later as an adult. Age A woman's fertility is affected by her age. The average age of a girl's first period (menarche) is 12-13 (12.5 years in the United States, 12.72 in Canada, 12.9 in the UK), but, in postmenarchal girls, about 80% of the cycles are anovulatory in the first year after menarche, 50% in the third and 10% in the sixth year. A woman's fertility peaks in the early and mid twenties, after which it starts to decline, with this decline being accelerated after age 35. However, the exact estimates of the chances of a woman to conceive after a certain age are not clear, with research giving differing results. The chances of a couple to successfully conceive at an advanced age depend on many factors, including the general health of a woman and the fertility of the male partner. Tobacco smoking Tobacco smoking is harmful to the ovaries, and the degree of damage is dependent upon the amount and length of time a woman smokes or is exposed to a smoke-filled environment. Nicotine and other harmful chemicals in cigarettes interfere with the body’s ability to create estrogen, a hormone that regulates folliculogenesis and ovulation. Also, cigarette smoking interferes with folliculogenesis, embryo transport, endometrial receptivity, endometrial angiogenesis, uterine blood flow and the uterine myometrium. Some damage is irreversible, but stopping smoking can prevent further damage. Smokers are 60% more likely to be infertile than non-smokers. Smoking reduces the chances of IVF producing a live birth by 34% and increases the risk of an IVF pregnancy miscarrying by 30%. Also, female smokers have an earlier onset of menopause by approximately 1–4 years. Sexually transmitted disease Sexually transmitted diseases are a leading cause of infertility. They often display few, if any visible symptoms, with the risk of failing to seek proper treatment in time to prevent decreased fertility. Body weight and eating disorders Twelve percent of all infertility cases are a result of a woman either being underweight or overweight. Fat cells produce estrogen, in addition to the primary sex organs. Too much body fat causes production of too much estrogen and the body begins to react as if it is on birth control, limiting the odds of getting pregnant. Too little body fat causes insufficient production of estrogen and disruption of the menstrual cycle. Both under and overweight women have irregular cycles in which ovulation does not occur or is inadequate. Proper nutrition in early life is also a major factor for later fertility. A study in the US indicated that approximately 20% of infertile women had a past or current eating disorder, which is five times higher than the general lifetime prevalence rate. A review from 2010 concluded that overweight and obese subfertile women have a reduced probability of successful fertility treatment and their pregnancies are associated with more complications and higher costs. In hypothetical groups of 1000 women undergoing fertility care, the study counted approximately 800 live births for normal weight and 690 live births for overweight and obese anovulatory women. For ovulatory women, the study counted approximately 700 live births for normal weight, 550 live births for overweight and 530 live births for obese women. The increase in cost per live birth in anovulatory overweight and obese women were, respectively, 54 and 100% higher than their normal weight counterparts, for ovulatory women they were 44 and 70% higher, respectively. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy poses a high risk of infertility. Chemotherapies with high risk of infertility include procarbazine and other alkylating drugs such as cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, busulfan, melphalan, chlorambucil and chlormethine. Drugs with medium risk include doxorubicin and platinum analogs such as cisplatin and carboplatin. On the other hand, therapies with low risk of gonadotoxicity include plant derivatives such as vincristine and vinblastine, antibiotics such as bleomycin and dactinomycin and antimetabolites such as methotrexate, mercaptopurine and 5-fluorouracil. Female infertility by chemotherapy appears to be secondary to premature ovarian failure by loss of primordial follicles. This loss is not necessarily a direct effect of the chemotherapeutic agents, but could be due to an increased rate of growth initiation to replace damaged developing follicles. Antral follicle count decreases after three series of chemotherapy, whereas follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) reaches menopausal levels after four series. Other hormonal changes in chemotherapy include decrease in inhibin B and anti-Müllerian hormone levels. Patients may choose between several methods of fertility preservation prior to chemotherapy, including cryopreservation of ovarian tissue, oocytes or embryos. Other factors that can cause acquired infertility There are many genes wherein mutation causes female infertility, as shown in table below. Also, there are additional conditions involving female infertility which are believed to be genetic but where no single gene has been found to be responsible, notably Mayer-Rokitansky-Küstner-Hauser Syndrome (MRKH). Finally, an unknown number of genetic mutations cause a state of subfertility, which in addition to other factors such as environmental ones may manifest as frank infertility. Chromosomal abnormalities causing female infertility include Turner syndrome. Some of these gene or chromosome abnormalities cause intersexed conditions, such as androgen insensitivity syndrome Genes wherein Gene !! Encoded protein !! Effect of deficiency BMP15 Bone morphogenetic protein 15 Hypergonadotrophic ovarian failure (POF4) BMPR1B Bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1B Ovarian dysfunction, hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism and acromesomelic chondrodysplasia CBX2 Autosomal 46,XY, male-to-female sex reversal (phenotypically perfect females) CHD7 Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 7 CHARGE syndrome and Kallmann syndrome (KAL5) DIAPH2 Diaphanous homolog 2 Hypergonadotrophic, premature ovarian failure (POF2A) FGF8 Fibroblast growth factor 8 Normosmic hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome (KAL6) FGFR1 Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 Kallmann syndrome (KAL2) FSHR FSH receptor Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome FSHB Follitropin subunit beta Deficiency of follicle-stimulating hormone, primary amenorrhoea and infertility FOXL2 Forkhead box L2 Isolated premature ovarian failure (POF3) associated with BPES type I 402C --> G mutations associated with human granulosa cell tumours FMR1 Fragile X mental retardation Premature ovarian failure (POF1) associated with premutations GNRH1 Gonadotropin releasing hormone Normosmic hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism GNRHR GnRH receptor Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism KAL1 Kallmann syndrome Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and insomnia, X-linked Kallmann syndrome (KAL1) KISS1R LHB Luteinizing hormone beta polypeptide LHCGR LH/choriogonadotrophin receptor Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (luteinizing hormone resistance) DAX1 Dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1 X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia with hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism NR5A1 POF1B Premature ovarian failure 1B Hypergonadotrophic, primary amenorrhea (POF2B) PROK2 Prokineticin Normosmic hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome (KAL4) PROKR2 Prokineticin receptor 2 Kallmann syndrome (KAL3) RSPO1 R-spondin family, member 1 46,XX, female-to-male sex reversal (individuals contain testes) SRY Sex-determining region Y Mutations lead to 46,XY females SOX9 SRY-related HMB-box gene 9 Autosomal 46,XY male-to-female sex reversal (campomelic dysplasia) TAC3 Tachykinin 3 Normosmic hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism TACR3 Tachykinin receptor 3 Normosmic hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism Diagnosis of infertility begins with a medical history and physical exam. The healthcare provider may order tests, including the following: There are genetic testing techniques under development to detect any mutation in genes associated with female infertility. Diagnosis and treatment of infertility should be made by physicians who are fellowship trained as reproductive endocrinologists. Reproductive Endocrinologists are usually Obstetrician-Gynecologists with advanced training in Reproductive Endocrinology & Infertility (in North America). These highly educated professionals and qualified physicians treat Reproductive Disorders affecting not only women but also men, children, and teens. Prospective patients should note that reproductive endocrinology & infertility medical practices do not see women for general maternity care. The practice is primarily focused on helping their patients to conceive and to correct any issues related to recurring pregnancy loss. Some cases of female infertility may be prevented through identified interventions: Ethnographic research into female infertility within “pronatalist developing societies” has shown that women who are infertile may be stigmatized, reflecting a deep-seated patriarchal belief system. In these societies, the vocation of motherhood is considered to be intrinsically linked to the notion of womanhood, so in effect, a woman’s infertility conflicts with normative concepts of gender identity. The woman’s inability to adopt this “mandatory status” and “gain entrance to the cult of motherhood” often leads to dysfunctional relationships with the in-laws, extended family and community members, culminating in feelings of “isolation, loneliness and despair”. Furthermore, this cultural milieu can impact negatively on “marital dynamics”, possibly leading to “divorce or polygamous remarriage”. 
