 Fletcher Allen Health Care is an academic medical center located in Burlington, Vermont. It is affiliated with the University of Vermont College of Medicine and the College of Nursing and Health Sciences and serves as both a regional referral center (providing advanced care to approximately one million people in Vermont and northern New York) and a community hospital (for approximately 160,000 residents in the Chittenden and Grand Isle Vermont counties). In 2012, Fletcher Allen’s nearly 7,150 employees included 500 University of Vermont Medical Group physicians (jointly employed by Fletcher Allen and the UVM College of Medicine), more than 1750 registered nurses, 160 advanced practice nurses and physician assistants, and approximately 300 residents (physicians in specialty training). The hospital offers 16 residency programs and 23 fellowship programs, and employs nearly a thousand volunteers throughout the hospital operations. Two of Vermont Children's Hospital at Fletcher Allen pediatric specialties - pulmonology and gastroenterology - were cited as being among the best in the nation by U.S. News & World Report's "Best Children's Hospitals" list for 2012-2013. For the second year in a row, U.S. News & World Report has designated Fletcher Allen a Best Regional Hospital. The magazine also named twenty-one physicians to its Top Doctors list and recognized five specialties as High Performing for 2012-2013. Twelve of the physicians on the Top Doctors list were ranked in the best 1% of specialists in the nation. Vermont’s academic medical center was also selected for the U.S. News Most Connected list for the second consecutive year, indicating it is one of the leading hospitals in the nation in the adoption of electronic medical records. The five specialty areas ranked as High Performing are Orthopedics, Neurology, Neurosurgery, Gynecology and Nephrology. To be included on this list, the quality of care must be on the same level as that provided by nationally ranked hospitals. Fletcher Allen Health Care consists of four major campuses: The organization also includes more than 30 patient-care sites and more than 100 outreach clinics, programs and services throughout Vermont and northern New York, including 11 primary care group practices, and generates approximately one billion in annual revenue. Fletcher Allen is also affiliated, directly or through the Fletcher Allen Partners corporate umbrella, with Central Vermont Medical Center and three institutions in northern New York: Alice Hyde Medical Center, Canton-Potsdam Hospital and Inter-Lakes Health. The Vermont Children's Hospital (VCH) at Fletcher Allen is a hospital-within-a-hospital. VCH offers comprehensive, family-centered primary care, specialty care, and neonatal and pediatric intensive care for children across our region. The 20-bed neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) is the only facility of its type in Vermont and cares for critically ill or premature infants in its 20-bed Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). The General Clinical Research Center at Fletcher Allen/University of Vermont is one of 78 in the country and the only one in northern New England. Resident researchers are pioneering treatments for heart disease, cancer, Parkinson’s disease, diabetes, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease. The medical center has comprehensive surgical services (neurological, cardiac, pediatric) and imaging equipment. It offers leading-edge radiology technology including a Philips high-field Open MRI, a Philips 3T MRI, a General Electric Signa LX 1.5 tesla system, and a Philips Brilliance 256-slice CT scanner that can produce highly detailed 3D images of the heart, the brain, and tiny blood vessels. As the only Level I Trauma Center Vermont, the hospital offers the region advanced technology and techniques to care for the most seriously ill and injured pediatric and adult patients. The hospital was the first organization in the United States to be verified as a Level I Trauma Center for both children and adults. Fletcher Allen Health Care was formed in 1995 from the merger of three organizations: In 2010, the Faculty Practice became known as the University of Vermont Medical Group, formalized through a joint affiliation with the University of Vermont and Fletcher Allen Health Care. The Medical Group is governed by a Board of Directors comprising the chairs/Health Care Service leaders, elected at-large faculty representatives, the president of the Medical Group, the UVM College of Medicine Dean, and Fletcher Allen CEO. In 1999, responding to proposals from chief executive William C. Boettcher, the State Department of Banking, Insurance, Securities and Health Care Administration (BISHCA) approved a $118 million plan called the Renaissance Project for new construction at Fletcher Allen. In 2001, the commission approved an amended proposal (also known as a Certificate of Need or CON) for $173 million. This second proposal was later described as "fraudulent" by the United States Attorney for the district including Vermont. This description was based on the fact that at the time Fletcher Allen management was maintaining two separate project budgets in an attempt to keep a major portion of the costs from BISHCA (specifically the cost of the parking garage). The final version of the proposal, approved in 2003, was $364 million. In the end, eight Fletcher Allen trustees resigned; the chief executive (CEO), chief financial (CFO) and chief operating officers (COO) resigned; the law firm retained by the hospital (Downs Rachlin Martin) agreed to pay $2 million in restitution and Fletcher Allen was fined $1 million. In August 2006 David Cox, former CFO, pleaded guilty to charges and admitted his role in the controversy. As of 2007, four former executives have been charged with crimes associated with the project. The former CEO, William Boettcher, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to two years on federal conspiracy charges. David Demers, a former senior vice president for planning, also pleaded guilty to felony conspiracy charges. Thad Krupka, the former COO, pleaded guilty in state court to three counts of misdemeanor false claims. Fletcher Allen Partners got bigger this week, bringing two upstate New York hospitals into the fold, joining Central Vermont Medical Center in Berlin, Vt., and Fletcher Allen Health Care itself. The affiliation with Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital Medical Center in Plattsburgh, N.Y., and Elizabethtown Community Hospital in Elizabethtown, N.Y., took effect on Jan. 1, 2013. In the first year since its formation, Fletcher Allen Partners - the parent corporation of Fletcher Allen Health Care and Central Vermont Medical Center - has implemented improved quality of care systems and practices and achieved significant cost reductions as the organizations work to fully integrate clinical and administrative operations. For the second consecutive year, Fletcher Allen Health Care has been ranked in the top 20 among 138 academic medical centers in the nation for quality of care and patient safety by the University HealthSystems Consortium (UHC), an alliance of the leading non-profit academic medical centers in the country. John Brumsted, M.D. was named president and chief executive officer of Fletcher Allen Health Care and its integrated system with Central Vermont Medical Center, known as Fletcher Allen Partners in February 2012. Brumsted led the hospital as Interim CEO upon the departure of Melinda Estes in August 2011. Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital Medical Center in Plattsburgh, and Elizabethtown Community Hospital have agreed in principle to become part of a four-hospital, cross-lake affiliation under Fletcher Allen Partners. Fletcher Allen Partners is the parent organization of Fletcher Allen Health Care in Burlington, and Central Vermont Medical Center in Berlin. The purpose of the proposed affiliation is to establish a coordinated, highly integrated health care system that will improve quality, increase access and lower costs of health care in the communities served by the four hospitals in Vermont and upstate New York. The hospitals hope the proposed affiliation can become effective late in 2012. Fletcher Allen and the University of Vermont’s College of Medicine and College of Nursing and Health Sciences celebrated the completion of the Clinical Simulation Laboratory at the facility’s UVM campus hub. The 9,000-square-foot facility allows trainees to practice on “patients” whose complex circuitry causes them to react as if they were human – but in a safe learning environment without the risk involved in learning on actual patients. Funding for the project came from a gift of the late Thomas Sullivan, MD, who worked and taught at Fletcher Allen and UVM, and a $1.75 million grant secured by U.S. Senator Patrick Leahy. For the third consecutive year, Fletcher Allen has been named to Practice Greenhealth’s Environmental Leadership Circle, that organization’s highest award. Practice Greenhealth is the country’s leading association devoted to environmentally responsible health care. The Leadership Circle has a membership of just 24 health care facilities throughout the country. This honor is given to facilities that “exemplify environmental excellence and are setting the highest standards for environmental practices and sustainability in health care.” Fletcher Allen’s Nutrition Services program has been recognized with two awards from Health Care Without Harm, an international coalition of more than 430 organizations working to transform the health care industry. Fletcher Allen won first place in two categories – sustainable food procurement and public policy and advocacy. Fletcher Allen’s new Radiation Oncology facility has earned gold certification in the nationally recognized Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) rating system. Gold is the second highest of four certification levels. This is the first hospital project in Vermont to be certified at the gold level, and only the second in New England. 
