 Fluorescent lamps have been suggested to have an impact on human health in various ways. Nocturnal exposure to light in the short wavelength ranges (below 530 nm) generated by some fluorescent lamps may interfere with mammalian circadian rhythms due to its suppressing effect on melatonin production. Suppression of melatonin has been linked to cancer in some studies. Fluorescent lamps with magnetic ballasts flicker at a normally unnoticeable frequency of 100 or 120 Hz and this flickering can cause problems for some individuals with light sensitivity, they are listed as problematic for some individuals with autism, epilepsy, lupus, chronic fatigue syndrome, Lyme disease, and vertigo. Newer fluorescent lights without magnetic ballasts have essentially eliminated flicker. The normally unnoticeable 100–120 Hz flicker from fluorescent tubes powered by electromagnetic ballasts are associated with headaches and eyestrain. Individuals with high flicker fusion threshold are particularly affected by electromagnetic ballasts: their EEG alpha waves are markedly attenuated and they perform office tasks with greater speed and decreased accuracy. Ordinary people have better reading performance using high frequency (20 kHz – 60 kHz) electronic ballasts than electromagnetic ballasts, although the effect was large only for the case of luminance contrast. Early studies suspected a relationship between the flickering of fluorescent lamps with electromagnetic ballasts and repetitive movement in autistic children. However, these studies had interpretive problems and have not been replicated. Compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) are driven by electronic ballasts which operate in the range of 25–60 kHz, which far exceeds the human ability to perceive flicker (25–70 Hz). The issue of blue or blue/ultraviolet sensitivity has been raised with respect to CFLs and other fluorescent lights at higher color temperatures (e.g., >4500°K). This effect can be compounded with sensitivity to pupillary flicker. Some fluorescent lamps emit ultraviolet radiation that in some circumstances can exceed safe levels. The Health Protection Agency of the United Kingdom has conducted research that concluded exposure to some compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) for 1 hour per day at a distance of less than 30 cm can exceed safe levels. Touching the exposed bulb results in equivalent exposure to ultraviolet radiation as that of being in direct sunlight. In 2009, Natural Resources Canada released a report describing the UV exposure due to lamps of several types. The report states that at 3 cm distance, the recommended daily exposure to ultraviolet radiation for skin and eye damage was attained between 50 minutes and 5 hours depending on the type of lamp; the report observes that such a close distance is unlikely in actual use. The report states that most bare spiral lamps tested gave off more UV than the 60 watt incandescent lamp tested, but that the double-envelope CFLs emitted less UV. At 30 cm distance, the recommended maximum daily exposure was attained between 3 hours and 6 hours, with little difference between the studied 60 Watt incandescent lamp and any bare-spiral CFL. The report states that the threshold limit values used represent otherwise healthy individuals who are not experiencing any hypersensitivity conditions or exposed to substances that increase UV sensitivity. Outdoor sunlight can supply the maximum recommended daily UV exposure in 20 to 100 minutes. The Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR) in 2008 reviewed the connections between artificial light and numerous human diseases, including: The World Health Organization’s IARC categorizes ELF and radiofrequency exposure as class 2B possibly carcinogenic. The electronic ballasts in fluorescent lights emit low and very low frequency radiation (1–100 kHz) with steep pulses and harmonics, and some fluorescent bulbs emit relatively high electric field strengths, although the effects of these can be reduced significantly by maintaining an appropriate distance from them. These fields can induce relatively high fields in humans standing or sitting close to them. Electric fields of this intensity have been associated with biological effects. The Seletun international scientific panel has called for all new CFLs to be fitted with filters, since studies also show that CFLs conduct voltage transients and harmonics (“dirty electricity”) onto the wiring and that these can have biological effects, especially as regards diabetes and cancers. Fluorescent bulbs use mercury. This is toxic if the bulb is broken. A broken bulb will mildly contaminate the local air (so the room should be ventilated) and the glass fragments are toxic.The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provide safety guidelines for how to clear up a broken fluorescent bulb. Mercury is particularly harmful to children and unborn babies, and so children and pregnant women should avoid being in the area whilst a bulb is cleared up. Bulbs which have reached the end of their life should not be disposed of in normal trash, as this will release the mercury. Several countries have specialised recycling or disposal systems for fluorescent bulbs, e.g. US bulb recycling. The U.S. EPA has stated that the amount of mercury in a compact fluorescent lightbulb (CFL) isless than the extra mercury that would be released by the U.S. average mix of power plants to provide the energy used by an equivalent incandescent bulb.[[Template:failed verification]]. In rare cases individuals with solar urticaria (allergy to sunlight) can get a rash from fluorescent lighting. Very photosensitive individuals with Systemic lupus erythematosus may experience disease activity under artificial light. Standard acrylic diffusers over the fluorescent lamps absorb nearly all the UV-B radiation and appear to protect against this. One paper suggested that in rare cases, fluorescent lighting can also induce depersonalization and derealization, subsequently, it can worsen depersonalization disorder symptomology.<ref name= "Simeon 03"> Research on these rare cases is very limited and cause and effect often cannot be duplicated. The charity Migraine Action reported concerns from members that CFL bulbs can cause migraines, and there are many anecdotal reports of such occurrences. 
