 Gastric outlet obstruction (often abbreviated as GOO) is a medical condition where there is an obstruction at the level of the pylorus, which is the outlet of the stomach. Individuals with gastric outlet obstruction will often have recurrent vomiting of food that has accumulated in the stomach, but which cannot pass into the small intestine due to the obstruction. The stomach often dilates to accommodate food intake and secretions. Causes of gastric outlet obstruction include both benign causes (such as peptic ulcer disease affecting the area around the pylorus), as well as malignant causes, such as gastric cancer. Treatment of the condition depends upon the underlying cause; it can involve endoscopic therapies (such as dilation of the obstruction with balloons or the placement of self expandable metallic stents), other medical therapies, or surgery to resolve the obstruction. The causes are divided into benign or malignant. In a peptic ulcer it is believed to be a result of edema and scarring of the ulcer, followed by healing and fibrosis, which leads to obstruction of the gastroduodenal junction (usually an ulcer in the first part of the duodenum). The main symptom is vomiting, which typically occurs after meals of undigested food, devoid of any bile. A history of previous peptic ulcers and loss of weight is not uncommon. In advanced cases, signs to look for on upon physical examination are wasting and dehydration. Visible Peristalsis may be present. Succussion splash is a splash-like sound heard over the stomach in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen on shaking the patient, with or without the stethoscope. The most confirmatory investigation is endoscopy of upper gastrointestinal tract. Laboratory Abdominal X-ray Barium meal and follow through Gastroscopy Treatment of gastric outlet obstruction depends on the cause, but is usually either surgical or medical. Medical In most patients with peptic ulcer disease, the oedema will usually settle with conservative management with nasogastric suction, replacement of fluids and electrolytes and proton pump inhibitors. SurgicalSurgery is indicated in cases of gastric outlet obstruction in which there is significant obstruction and in cases where medical therapy has failed. Endoscopic balloon therapy may be attempted as an alternative to an operation but the success rates are low. The operation usually performed is an antrectomy, the removal of the antral portion of the stomach. Other surgical approaches include: vagotomy, the severing of the vagus nerve, the Billroth I, a procedure which involves anastomosing the duodenum to the distal stomach, or a gastrojejunostomy. The differential diagnosis of gastric outlet obstruction may include: hiatal hernia, gastroesophageal reflux, adrenal insufficiency, and inborn errors of metabolism. 
