 George P. Chrousos is professor and chairman of the Department of Pediatrics at the Athens University Medical School. He was previously Senior Investigator, Director of the Pediatric Endocrinology Section and Training Program, and Chief of the Pediatric and Reproductive Endocrinology Branch of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health (NIH). He is also Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, Physiology and Biophysics at Georgetown University Medical School and Distinguished Visiting Scientist, NICHD, NIH. Dr. Chrousos was the first General Director of the Foundation of Biomedical Research of the Academy of Athens (2001–2002)[1]. He holds the UNESCO Chair on Adolescent Health Care and the John Kluge Chair in Technology and Society, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. [2]. Dr. Chrousos is among the 250 most prominent clinical investigators in the world. He has authored more than 1100 scientific publications, has edited 26 books and his work has been cited over 60,000 times. According to the ISI he is the highest cited Clinical Pediatrician and Endocrinologist in the world. Chrousos was born in Patras, Greece, attended the University of Athens Medical School and finished as the valedictorian of his class in 1975. He completed his doctorate thesis at the University of Athens, followed by a residency in Pediatrics at New York University Medical School, New York, NY, and a fellowship in Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes at the Clinical Center of the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. He is Board Certified in Pediatrics/ Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes. He has held the positions at NIH of directorship of the ACGME-accredited Affiliate NIH/Georgetown University Pediatric Endocrinology Training Program, Chief of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, Pediatric Endocrinology Section, and finally Chief of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Pediatric and Reproductive Endocrinology Branch. Dr. Chrousos went rapidly through the academic hierarchy steps from Assistant Professor to Full Professor of Pediatrics at Georgetown University, which he still holds, in addition to his professorship at Athens. Chrousos has focused his research on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and has extensively studied the neuroendocrine alterations associated with mood disorders, sleep, pain perception, and immune function. In particular, he has worked on the glucocorticoid signaling system diseases of the HPA axis, such as Cushing’s syndrome, Addison’s disease, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and the physiologic and molecular mechanisms of stress. Early in his career, he described in the Journal of Clinical Investigation the Glucocorticoid Resistance Syndrome, a rare genetic disease of the glucocorticoid receptor that causes hypertension and hyperandrogenism in children and adults [3]. Subsequently, he has contributed the majority of the international original publications on this syndrome, which has served as a model of the study of the physiologic functions of these key steroid hormones that regulate the homeostasis of the organism. He has an outstanding record of over 1100 scientific papers, edited 26 books, including 2 popular electronic volumes and 2 encyclopedias, and his work has been cited over 60,000 times throughout the scientific literature. He is one of the most cited physician scientists in the world (Institute of Scientific Information, ISI highly cited) both in the fields of Clinical Medicine and Biology and Biochemistry. Dr. Chrousos’s published work has an h index of 123. He has published his work in journals of the highest caliber, such as the New England Journal of Medicine, the Journal of Clinical Investigation, the Annals of Internal Medicine, PNAS, Science, Nature, etc. He has helped to develop the careers of over 60 young physicians and scientists, many of whom are now professors and chairpersons in Europe, the United States, Australia and Latin America, and directed several training programs for physicians for many years. He taught at the University of Ioannina Medical School, Greece for 10 years (1980–1990). He has had a number of visiting professorships and given prestigious and named lectures throughout the world. {{Persondata | NAME = Chrousos, George | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 1951-07-18| PLACE OF BIRTH = Patras, Greece | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
