 Geriatric Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation is a peer-reviewed academic journal that publishes papers six times a year in the field of Orthopedics. The journal's editor is Stephen L. Kates, MD (University of Rochester Medical Center). It has been in publication since 2010 and is currently published by SAGE Publications. The deputy editor of the Journal is Simon Mears, MD, PhD, associate professor of orthopedic surgery at Johns Hopkins University. Geriatric Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation provides clinical information concerning musculoskeletal conditions affecting the aging population. The journal mainly focuses on the care of geriatric orthopaedic patients and their rehabilitation, providing a forum for the debate and discussion within the field. Geriatric Orthopedic Surgery and Rehabilitation (GOS) publishes peer-reviewed manuscripts concerning patients who are over age 65. This is the fastest growing part of the population in many parts of the world. This is the first journal to address the geriatric orthopedic patient specifically. The Journal is open access. In January 2011, the Journal published a special issue entitled "A guide to improving the care of patients with fragility fractures." This issue carried a special blue cover and is referred to as the Bluebook on Fragility Fracture Care for the United States healthcare market. The Bluebook describes important improvements to the system of healthcare for older adults with the fracture in the United States. It is based upon the British orthopedic Association Bluebook published first in 2003. Both blue books advocate strongly for improved care for older adults with fracture.The aging of the post world war 2 baby boom generation will create the so-called silver tsunami of older adults. This demographic change is particularly notable in Europe, Japan, and North America. Many of these older adults will require orthopedic surgical care on a variety of conditions. Creation of a journal dedicated to serving this population was long overdue. Several of the articles published in G0S are not only directed at health care providers but also to healthcare policymakers in the hopes of improving healthcare for older adults. All manuscripts published by the Journal undergo rigorous peer review. Geriatric Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation is abstracted and indexed in the following databases: Google Scholar 
