 The Glasgow effect refers to the poor health and low life expectancy of Glaswegians compared to the rest of the UK and Europe. The hypothesis among epidemiologists is that poverty alone does not appear to account for the disparity. Equally deprived areas of the UK such as Liverpool and Manchester have higher life expectancies, and the wealthiest ten percent of the Glasgow population have a lower life expectancy than the same group in other cities. Various hypotheses have been proposed to account for the effect, including vitamin D deficiency, cold winters, higher levels of poverty than the figures suggest, high levels of stress, and a culture of alienation and pessimism. Research led by David Walsh of the Glasgow Centre for Population Health in 2010 concluded that the deprivation profiles of Glasgow, Liverpool and Manchester are almost identical, but premature deaths in Glasgow are over 30 per cent higher, and all deaths around 15 per cent higher, across almost the entire population. The city's mortality rates are the highest in the UK and among the highest in Europe. With a population of 1.2 million in greater Glasgow, life expectancy at birth is 71.6 years for men, nearly seven years below the national average of 78.2 years, and 78 years for women, over four years below the national average of 82.3. Epidemiologists are unable to explain the overall mortality gap, which did not appear until 1950 at the earliest. "It is as if a malign vapour rises from the Clyde at night and settles in the lungs of sleeping Glaswegians," according to The Economist. According to Walsh et al. it appears to have widened since the 1970s. Hypotheses include vitamin D deficiency caused by a lack of sunlight, more poverty than the figures suggest, cold winters, high levels of stress, a culture of alienation, and pessimism brought on by either or both the lingering effects of industrialisation and the city's more recent deindustrialisation. Yet in comparison to other similarly deindustrialised European cities, Glasgow's 15 percent higher mortality rate persists. Dr Harry Burns, chief medical officer for Scotland, has referred to research suggesting that chronically activated stress responses – especially in children – affect the structure of parts of the frontal lobes of the brain, and that these determine the physical reaction to stress, which could result in chronic ill health. The ability to attain good health, he suggests, depends in part on whether people feel in control of their lives, and whether they see their environments as threatening or supportive. There has as yet been no study measuring comparative levels of cortisol, a hormone involved in regulating stress, in the populations of different cities. 
