 Glen Cove Emergency Medical Services (EMS) is a municipal department in the City of Glen Cove, New York. The department is a New York State Dept of Health-Certified Advanced Life Support agency that provides around the clock emergency medical transportation and care in the city. In addition to ambulance calls, they also provide non-emergency services in the city which includes public education, community event support and emergency preparedness. An EMS team is also detailed to every official City of Glen Cove event. The department operates out of a single station, EMS Headquarters, located at 8 Glen Cove Ave. Although the EMS department works closely and has developed an excellent relationship with the City of Glen Cove Fire Dept and Police Department, they are a separate third-service within the city. The 60 member strong department is ran by the Chief's Office and Line-Officers who are elected by the membership. The Chief's Office consists of the Chief of Department, First Assistant Chief and Second Assistant Chief and is responsible for the administration, management and day-to-day operations of the department. The Line Officers consists of the Captain and 3 Lieutenants. These officers are responsible for the membership and the readiness of all emergency vehicles. The membership is broken down into 3 separate groups. Each group is overseen by a Lieutenant. The volunteer membership is broken down into Part-Time and Full-Time. A Full-Time member is required to commit 20 volunteer hours per month, become a qualified driver of the ambulances and become a NYS Emergency Medical Technician within 18 months of joining. There is no residency requirement for either Part-Time or Full-Time status. A Part-Time member is required to commit 10 volunteer hours per month and become a qualified driver of the ambulances. Completing a NYS Emergency Medical Technician course is optional. Part-Time membership status was designed for members of the community who would like to make a difference in helping but does not want to become an EMT. The department provides all radio communications, uniforms, badges, turnout gear, apparel and training at no cost to the member. Currently the department operates with 4 NYS-DOH certified ambulances. Ambulance Unit #5281 is a white 2004 Ford e350 Type-III. Ambulance Unit# 5282 is a maroon 2010 Ford e450 Type-III. Ambulance Unit# 5283 is a maroon 2010 Ford e450 Type-III. Ambulance Unit# 5284 is a 2010 white Ford e350 Type-II van style ambulance. The department has a First Responder Program. This program utilizes NYS Emergency Medical Technicians and Paramedics operating response vehicles to reach the patient faster and provide medical care before the ambulance arrives on scene. These first response vehicles carry the same life saving equipment and medication that ambulances carry. There are 3 first responders that are in service today. First Responder Unit #5297 is an Advanced Life Support (ALS) first responder that EMT-Critical Care and Paramedic members could sign out. First Responder Unit# 5298 is a Basic Life Support (BLS) first responder that EMT members could sign out. First Responder Unit #5299 is a first responder unit that department officers (Captain, Lt's) could sign out. In addition to the ambulances/first responders, the department also operates several support vehicles and equipment. The support vehicles include an 8 passenger utility van used to transport members to and from training classes, a Mass Casualty (MCI) truck used at major incidents with multiple patients, 16 foot special operations trailer used for first aide stations and command post applications, 2 mountain bikes used for special events and a 6x6 all-terrain vehicle used for special events and special operations. {| class="wikitable"|-! Year !! Call Volume|-Calls| 2012 || 2,374|-| 2011 || 2,389|-| 2010 || 2,244|-| 2009 || 2,291|-| 2008 || 2,188|} 
