 Glucagon rescue is the emergency injection of glucagon in case of severe diabetic hypoglycemia. It is needed during seizures and/or unconsciousness by an insulin user who is unable at that point to help themselves. Glucagon will facilitate the release of stored glucose back into the bloodstream, raising the blood glucose level. Rescue has been simplified by the development of the glucagon hypoglycemia rescue kit, consisting of: At the first signs of hypoglycemia, an insulin user should treat it immediately by consuming carbohydrate to restore blood glucose to safe levels (thereby preventing progression to severe hypoglycemia). However, not all insulin users can feel and recognize the early signs, particularly when sleeping. This can quickly lead to an emergency resulting in unconsciousness, inability to swallow, seizures, and in extreme cases death. In the past, treatment consisted of intravenous delivery of dextrose (glucose) usually in the emergency room; however, the delay in treatment due to emergency response and transport to a medical facility is life threatening. The glucagon rescue kit facilitates rapid rescue by a simple injection, which does not require medical expertise, and can be done quickly and easily outside of a medical facility. Glucagon rescue kits are manufactured by Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly and Company. Novo Nordisk manufactures the GlucaGen HypoKit and Eli Lilly and Company manufactures the Glucagon Emergency Rescue Kit. The instructions for using the emergency glucagon rescue kit can be simplified to the four essential steps as shown in the pictures inside the box cover. In an emergency, a potential rescuer may unroll these instructions and then decide not to perform the rescue. The steps to perform glucagon rescue and perhaps save a life are few and simple. However, the instructions that are supplied with the glucagon rescue kit are long, and potentially complicated to use.There are three counter-productive issues with the instructions: The kit has been carefully designed to facilitate rescue outside of a medical facility by non-medical personnel. While the instruction sheet may be helpful to a pharmacist and in prior training for glucagon administration, the sheet discourages the actual and proper use of the product. These instructions come with the kit as supplied in the United Kingdom, and although expanded from the four necessary steps illustrated in instructional pictures inside the top cover of the glucagon rescue kit box, are still straightforward and less complicated to use than the United States instructions, as detailed above. However, the kit has been carefully designed to facilitate rescue outside of a medical facility by non-medical personnel, and the four necessary steps, as illustrated inside the plastic box, should be clear enough not to require these additional instructions in the case of a medical emergency. Public awareness of other forms of life saving measures has increased dramatically in the past, such as: Some U.S. union teacher contracts stipulate they shall not be allowed to deliver glucagon or even be trained in administration of glucagon. The purpose of the off-label ‘mini-dose’ is to avoid an emergency condition that may require glucagon rescue. This might be needed in cases such as when a diabetic child is injected with insulin before breakfast, eats, and then vomits and cannot eat again: with the injected insulin working its way into the bloodstream and no carbohydrate to balance, there may soon be a hypoglycemic emergency. To avoid severe hypoglycemia (or alternatively avoid a trip to the hospital for intravenous glucose), the glucagon from the emergency rescue kit can be used in a measured dose to maintain the blood glucose level. Instead of the glucagon emergency syringe and its large bore needle, a standard U-100 insulin syringe can be used. The recommended dose is: The mini-dose treatment should be repeated as necessary to maintain blood sugar until food can be eaten. Medical studies have shown that the mini-dose rescue is tolerated well and effective. The following scientific study papers may be of interest to those wishing to learn more about glucagon rescue in severe hypoglycemia: ‘GlucaGen HypoKit’ from Novo Nordisk ‘Glucagon Emergency Kit’ from Eli Lilly and Company GlucaGen from Bedford Laboratories 
