 Harry Prosen MD (born 1930) is a North American psychiatrist. He is Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioural Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, USA; Professor of Psychiatry, University of Manitoba, Canada; and past president of the Canadian Psychiatric Association. He has held leadership roles with the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the American Psychiatric Association. Canadian by birth, Prosen obtained his initial qualifications from the University of Manitoba in the 1950s, before spending part of his residency at the University of Chicago studying under a number of luminaries including Heinz Kohut. For more than 50 years, Prosen has been actively involved in both clinical and teaching psychiatry. He was Head of the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Manitoba from 1975 to 1987; and Chairman of the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Medicine at the Medical College of Wisconsin from 1987 to 2003. He has been on numerous clinical, academic, institutional, government and editorial boards in both Canada and the United States; and been consultant to many hospitals, universities and associations. From 1978 to 1979, he was the President of the Canadian Psychiatric Association. His earlier work focused on inter-generational issues in families, focusing particularly on empathy and empathic deficits. Much of this work originated in studying variations of the life-stages of humans, then developing an inter-generational approach to psychiatric treatment. Prosen’s interest in empathy prepared him well for his later work with primates, in particular bonobos, considered to be the most empathetic of all primates. Since 1998, he has been psychiatric consultant to the Bonobo Species Preservation Society, assisting primatologists working with one of the largest collections of captive bonobo primates in the world at the Milwaukee County Zoo, studying bonobo culture and development. This work has led to Prosen receiving numerous consultations from the United States and other parts of the world concerning psychological and other problems in primates. Recently, the rehabilitation of an emotionally disturbed young bonobo named “Brian” generated substantial publicity.Prosen’s interests extend to psychology, neurology and biology. Since 2005, he has been a noted advocate of Australian biologist Jeremy Griffith’s theses on the human condition. 
