 Harry F. Hull, MD, is president of HF Hull and Associates, a consulting firm focused on infectious disease epidemiology. He is also an adjunct professor in the Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Medical School in Minneapolis. Dr. Hull received his MD degree from Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore, Maryland. He completed his pediatric residency at the University of Washington, Seattle, and University of Arizona, Tucson. He served as an Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS) officer for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Prior to opening his consulting practice, Dr. Hull was the State Epidemiologist for the Minnesota Department of Health from 2000-2006. He was assigned by CDC to the World Health Organization in Geneva Switzerland from 1990-2000 to work on global polio eradication and led the initiative for 4 years. He also served as the State Epidemiologist for New Mexico. Among his professional affiliations, Dr. Hull is board certified in pediatrics and is a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics. He was a member of the United States Public Health Service Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, serving as chair of the anthrax and rabies working groups and member of the human papilloma virus, hepatitis and influenza working groups. He was a member of CDC’s expert committee on the elimination of rubella from the United States. Dr. Hull is a past president of the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists. Dr. Hull has published nearly 100 articles in the scientific literature. He has recently completed studies of herd immunity produced by immunizing school children against influenza and school-located immunization programs led by private physicians. Dr. Hull is a physician epidemiologist with more than 35 years of experience in infectious disease control. He is an expert in food borne diseases, vaccine preventable diseases and the epidemiology of infectious diseases. He has served as an expert witness for 6 years, having worked for both plaintiff and defense on more than 80 cases. He has been retained as an expert in cases related to: Listeriosis from Colorado cantaloupe; Salmonella outbreaks from peanut butter, peanut paste, white pepper and fast food restaurant chains; E. coli O157:H7 from 2 different restaurant chains; Yersinia from pasteurized milk; Campylobacter from contaminated peas; hepatitis C transmitted in medical settings. He has been deposed on 15 times and testified at trial on 3 occasions. Dr. Hull consults with YUM! Brands on food safety issues and has recently served as a medical advisor to 4 vaccine companies. He also serves as a consultant to the World Health Organization on global polio eradication. {{Persondata | NAME = Hull, Harry | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
