 Hemangioblastomas (capilliary hemangioblastomas) Hemangioblastomas are composed of endothelial cells, pericytes and stromal cells. In VHL syndrome the von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL) is dysfunctional, usually due to mutation and/or gene silencing. In normal circumstances, pVHL is involved in the inhibition of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 α (HIF-1α) by ubiquitin mediated proteosomal degradation. In these dysfunctional cells pVHL cannot degrade HIF-1α, causing it to accumulate. HIF-1α causes the production of vascular endothelial growth factor, platelet derived growth factor B, erythropoietin and transforming growth factor alpha, which act to stimulate growth of cells within the tumour. The primary diagnosis is made with a computed tomography scan (CT scan). On a scan, hemangioblastoma shows as a well-defined, black region in the cerebellum with a white nodule on the wall. Sometimes multiple lesions are present. The treatment for hemangioblastoma is surgical excision of the tumour. Although usually straightforward to carry out, recurrence of the tumor or more tumors at a different site develop in approximately 20% of patients. Gamma Knife Radiosurgery as well as LINAC have also been employed to successfully treat recurrence and control tumor growth of cerebellar hemangioblastomas. The outcome for hemangioblastoma is very good, if surgical extraction of the tumor can be achieved; excision is possible in most cases and permanent neurologic deficit is uncommon and can be avoided altogether if the tumor is diagnosed and treated early. Persons with VHL syndrome have a bleaker prognosis than those who have sporadic tumors since those with VHL syndrome usually have more than one lesion. Hemangioblastomas can cause polycythemia. Hemangioblastoma are the rarest central nervous system tumours, accounting for less than 2%. Hemangioblastomas usually occur in adults, yet tumors may appear in VHL syndrome at much younger ages. Men and women are approximately at the same risk. Although they can occur in any section of the central nervous system, they usually occur in either side of the cerebellum, the brain stem or the spinal cord. 
