 Hereditary spherocytosis is a genetically-transmitted (autosomal dominant) form of spherocytosis, an auto-hemolytic anemia characterized by the production of red blood cells that are sphere-shaped rather than bi-concave disk shaped (donut-shaped), and therefore more prone to hemolysis. On a blood smear, Howell-Jolly bodies may be seen within red blood cells. Signs and symptoms include anemia, jaundice, and an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). It is the most common disorder of the red cell membrane, affecting 1 in 2,000 people of Northern European ancestry. According to Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, the frequency is at least 1 in 5,000. As in non-hereditary spherocytosis, the spleen destroys the abnormal spherocytes. This hemolysis results directly in varying degrees of anemia (causing pallor and fatigue), hyperbilirubinemia (causing jaundice), and splenomegaly. Acute cases can threaten to cause hypoxia through anemia and acute kernicterus through hyperbilirubinemia, particularly in newborns. Most cases can be detected soon after birth. An adult with this disease should have their children tested, although the presence of the disease in children is usually noticed soon after birth. Occasionally, the disease will not be noticed until the child is about 4 or 5 years of age. Chronic symptoms include anemia, increased blood viscosity, and splenomegaly.<ref name=Dx&TxGuidelines;> Furthermore, the detritus of the broken-down blood cells—unconjugated or indirect bilirubin--accumulates in the gallbladder, and can cause pigmented gallstones or "sludge" to develop. In chronic patients, an infection or other illness can cause an increase in the destruction of red blood cells, resulting in the appearance of acute symptoms, a hemolytic crisis. Spherocytosis patients who are heterozygous for a hemochromatosis gene may suffer from iron overload despite the hemochromatosis genes being recessive In a peripheral blood smear, the red blood cells will appear abnormally small and lack the central pallor that is present in normal red blood cells. These changes are also seen in non-hereditary spherocytosis, but they are typically more marked in hereditary spherocytosis. The number of immature red blood cells (reticulocyte count) will be elevated. Other protein deficiencies cause hereditary elliptocytosis, pyropoikilocytosis or stomatocytosis. In longstanding cases and in patients who have taken iron supplementation or received numerous blood transfusions, iron overload may be a significant problem, being a potential cause of cardiomyopathy and liver disease. Measuring iron stores is therefore considered part of the diagnostic approach to hereditary spherocytosis. An osmotic fragility test can aid in the diagnosis. In this test, the spherocytes will rupture in mildly hypotonic solutions - this is due to increased permeability of the spherocyte membrane to salt and water. Although the osmotic fragility test is widely considered the gold standard for diagnosing hereditary spherocytosis, it misses as many as 25% of cases. Flow cytometric analysis of eosin-5′-maleimide-labeled intact red blood cells and the acidified glycerol lysis test are two additional options to aid diagnosis. Hereditary spherocytosis is an autosomal dominant or recessive trait, most commonly (though not exclusively) found in Northern European and Japanese families, although an estimated 25% of cases are due to spontaneous mutations. A patient has a 50% chance of passing the mutation onto each of his/her offspring. Hereditary spherocytosis is caused by a variety of molecular defects in the genes that code for spectrin (alpha and beta), ankyrin, band 3 protein, protein 4.2, and other erythrocyte membrane proteins: Type OMIM Gene Locus HS1 ANK1 8p11.2 HS2 SPTB 14q22-q23 HS3 SPTA 1q21 HS4 SLC4A1 17q21-q22 HS5 EPB42 15q15 These proteins are necessary to maintain the normal shape of an erythrocyte, which is a biconcave disk. The integrating protein that is most commonly defective is ankyrin which is responsible for incorporation and binding of spectrin, thus in its dysfunction cytoskeletal instabilities ensue. As the spleen normally targets abnormally shaped red cells (which are typically older), it also destroys spherocytes. In the spleen, the passage from the cords of Billroth into the sinusoids may be seen as a bottleneck, where erythrocytes need to be flexible in order to pass through. In hereditary spherocytosis, erythrocytes fail to pass through and get phagocytosed, causing extravascular hemolysis. At this point, there exists no cure for the genetic defect that causes hereditary spherocytosis. Current management focuses on interventions that limit the severity of the disease. Treatment options include: Experimental gene therapy exists to treat hereditary spherocytosis in lab mice; however, this treatment has not yet been tried on humans due to all of the risks involved in human gene therapy. 
