 Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is a system of medical treatment for surgically menopausal, perimenopausal and postmenopausal women and transgender women. It is based on the idea that the treatment may prevent discomfort caused by diminished circulating estrogen and progesterone hormones, and in the case of the surgically or prematurely menopausal, that it may prolong life and may reduce incidence of dementia. It involves the use of one or more of a group of medications designed to artificially boost hormone levels. The main types of hormones involved are estrogens, progesterone or progestins, and less commonly, testosterone. It is often referred to as "treatment" rather than therapy. Attitudes towards HRT changed in 2002 following the announcement by the Women's Health Initiative of the National Institutes of Health that those receiving the treatment (Prempro) in the main part of their study had a slightly larger incidence of breast cancer, heart attacks and strokes, and though they also had reduced incidence of colorectal cancer and bone fractures, the benefits did not outweigh the risks. The United States Preventive Task Force concludes that the harms of long term therapy is greater than the potential benefits. While HRT is often useful for menopausal symptoms it is not recommended for the prevention of chronic conditions per the United States Preventive Services Task Force. There have been a number of large scale cross sectional and cohort studies on the effects of hormone replacement in menopause, with the largest conducted in the United States, the United Kingdom and China. Demographically, the vast majority of data available is about post-menopausal American women with at least some degree of co-morbidity, and the mean participant age in most studies is over 60 years. In 2002 the Women's Health Initiative was published looking at the effects of hormonal replacement therapy in post-menopausal women. The study found disparate results for all cause mortality with hormone replacement, finding it to be lower when HRT was begun earlier, between age 50-59, but higher when begun after age 60. Both age groups had a slightly higher incidence of breast cancer, while heart attacks and strokes were increased in older patients, although not significantly higher in the younger group. Progesterone is the major anabolic hormone for breast tissue, and accordingly breast cancer was not increased in patients who were on estrogen therapy alone after hysterectomy. Sole therapy with estrogen is contraindicated if the uterus is still present due to the proliferative effect of hormone on the endometrial lining. The WHI also found a reduced incidence of colorectal cancer when estrogen and progesterone were used together, and most importantly, bone fractures. Ultimately, all cause mortality was lower for HRT than a menopausal hormonal profile when therapy was begun in the 50s, but not after age 60. Some findings of the WHI were reconfirmed in a larger national study done in the UK, known as The Million Women Study, leading to a reduction in the number of post-menopausal women on hormone replacement therapy. The authors of the WHI recommended that women with normal rather than surgical menopause should take the lowest feasible dose of HRT for the shortest possible time to minimize their reported risks. These recommendations have not held up with further data analysis however. Later studies released by the WHI showed that all cause mortality was not dramatically different between the groups receiving conjugated equine estrogen (CEE), those receiving estrogen and progesterone, and those not on HRT at all. Specifically, the relative risk for all-cause mortality were 1.04 (confidence interval 0.88–1.22) in the CEE-alone trial and 1.00 (CI, 0.83–1.19) in the estrogen plus progesterone trial. Further In an analysis that pooled data from both trials, post-menopausal HRT was associated with a significant reduction in mortality (RR, 0.70; CI, 0.51–0.96) among women ages 50 to 59 yr. This would represent five fewer deaths per 1000 women per 5 yr of therapy. A robust Bayesian meta-analysis from 19 randomized clinical trials reported similar data with a RR of mortality of 0.73 (CI, 0.52–0.96) in women younger than age 60. However, MHT had minimal effect among those between 60 and 69 years of age (RR, 1.05; CI, 0.87–1.26) and was associated with a borderline significant increase in mortality in those between 70 to 79 years of age (RR, 1.14; CI, 0.94 –1.37; P for trend < 0.06). Similarly, in the HERS trial, with participants having a mean age of 66.7 yr, MHT did not reduce in total mortality (RR, 1.08; CI, 0.84 –1.38). A 2003 meta-analysis of 30 randomized trials of menopausal HRT in relation to mortality showed that it was associated with a nearly 40% reduction in mortality in trials in which participants had a mean age of less than 60 yr or were within 10 yr of menopause onset but was unrelated to mortality in the other trials. The findings in the younger age groups were similar to those in the observational Nurses' Health Study (RR for mortality, 0.63; CI, 0.56 – 0.70). The beneficial profile of HRT was confirmed in a consensus expert opinion published by the The Endocrine Society, which stated that when taken during perimenopause, or the initial years of menopause, hormonal therapy carries significantly fewer risks than previously published, and reduces all cause mortality in most patient scenarios. The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology released a position statement in 2009 that approved of HRT in the appropriate clinical scenario. Proprietary mixtures of progestins and conjugated equine estrogens are a commonly prescribed form of HRT. As the most common and longest-prescribed type of estrogen used in HRT, most studies of HRT involve CEE. More recently developed forms of drug delivery include suppositories, subdermal implants, skin patches and gels. They have more local effect, lower doses, fewer side effects and constant rather than cyclical serum hormone levels. The data published by the WHI suggested supplemental estrogen increased risk of venous emboli and breast cancer but was protective against osteoporosis and colorectal cancer, while the impact on cardiovascular disease was mixed. These results were later confirmed in trials from the United Kingdom, but not in more recent studies from France and China. Hormone replacement therapy's goal is to mitigate discomfort caused by diminished circulating estrogen and progesterone hormones in menopause. In those with premature or surgically induced menopause, a combination HRT is often recommended, as it may also prolong life and may decrease a woman's chances of developing endometrial cancers associated with unopposed estrogen therapy, as well by decreasing the incidence of dementia.<ref name= "eden">Eden, K.J., & Wylie, K.R. (2009). Quality of sexual life and menopause. Women’s Health, 5 (4), 385-396. doi:10.2217/whe.09.24 The main hormones involved are estrogen, progesterone and progestin. Some recent therapies include the use of androgens as well.<ref name= "ziaei">Ziaei, S., Moghasemi, M., & Faghihzadeh, S. (2010). Comparative effects of conventional hormone replacement therapy and tibolone on climacteric symptoms and sexual dysfunction in postmenopausal women. Climateric, 13, 147-156. doi:10.1016/j.maturitas.2006.04.014 Data from numerous studies have consistently found that HRT leads to improvements in several aspects of menopausal symptomology, including aspects of sexual dysfunction. Sexuality is a critical aspect of quality of life for the large majority of menopausal women; therefore, any features of the menopausal transition that can negatively affect a woman’s sexuality have the ability to significantly alter her quality of life. The most prevalent of female sexual dysfunctions liked to menopause include lack of desire and low libido, both of which can be explained by changes in hormonal physiology. Improvements in sexual pain, vaginal lubrication and orgasm are found to be statistically different from those using HRT. Estrogens have positive effects of mood, sexual function, target end organs, and cognitive function. It has also been shown to prevent amyloid plaque formation, oxiadative stress, or deterioration of the cholinergic neurotransmitter system, all of which contribute to the etiology of Alzheimer’s Disease. Comparisons between orally administered pill and transdermal patch suggests that when estrogens are taken orally the risks of thrombophlebitis and pulmonary embolism are increased, an effect which is not seen with topical administration. Transdermal and transvaginal administration are not subject to first pass metabolism, and so lack the anabolic effects that oral therapy has on hepatic synthesis of Vitamin K dependent clotting factors. This effect refers only to patches for post menopausal hormone replacement, which contain 17 beta estradiol, not those used in oral contraceptive therapy, which contain ethinyl estradiol. The later is associated with an increased incidence of venous clot. The WHI also showed an increased incidence arterial disease, namely stroke, in patients who began HRT after the age of 65, although this effect was not significantly present in those who began therapy during their fifth decade. At the time of menopause, there are predictable effects on the lipid profile. Specifically, HDL decreases, while LDL, triglycerides and lipoprotein a increase. Supplemental estrogen improves the lipid profile by reversing each of these effects. Beyond this, it improves cardiac contractility, coronary artery blood flow, metabolism of carbohydrates, and decreases platelet aggregation and plaque formation. The impact of hormone replacement on cardiovascular morbidity is a subject of much controversy in the medical literature. The reduced risk of cardiovascular diseases associated with hormone replacement therapy (HRT), reported in observational studies, has not been subsequently confirmed in randomized clinical trials. The increased risk of cardiovascular disease in the WHI was not statistically significant, and only found in the oldest women, and those who started HRT late after menopause began. The increase in risks of coronary heart disease in the treatment arm of the study varied according to age and years since onset of menopause. Women aged 50 to 59 using HRT showed a trend towards lower risk of coronary heart disease, as did women who were within five years of the onset of menopause. The adverse cardiovascular outcomes may only apply to oral dosing with the progestin and equine estrogens in oral systemic therapy, while topical estradiol and estriol may not produce the same risks, due to the absence of anabolic effects of hepatic vitamin K dependent clotting factors. Another recent randomized controlled trial found HRT may reduces development of heart disease and reduce the incidence of heart attack in women between 50 and 59, although not in women past the age of 60. The mechanism may have something to do with the contradictory effects of increasing propensity for clotting, versus positive effect on the lipid profile. Follow-up studies are being performed which are intended to confirm these findings. The increased risk of breast cancer remains. While combined estrogen-progesterone supplementation has been linked to an increased incidence of endometrial cancer, the specific subtype is usually stage I, or in situ, and has extremely low morbidity and mortality, and studies in American women have shown the tumor to not have propensity for growth into the myometrium or parametrial soft tissues. When seen in the context of all cause mortality, women who take estrogen and develop endometrial cancer have high survival rates than women who do not take hormonal therapy at all, which was due to the preventive effect of HRT on hip fractures. Unopposed estrogen (the supplementation of endogenous estrogens without a progestogen) can also result in endometrial hyperplasia, a precursor to endometrial cancer. The extensive use of high-dose estrogens for birth control in the 1970s is thought to have resulted in a significant increase in the incidence of this type of cancer. HRT is effective at reversing the effects of aging on muscle and promoting reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) via the induction of cholesterol ABC transporters. According to a 2007 presentation at an American Academy of Neurology meeting, hormone therapy taken soon after menopause may help protect against dementia, but it raises the risk of mental decline in women who do not take hormone replacement until they are older. Dementia risk was 1% in women who started HRT early, and 1.7% in women who didn't, (i.e. women who didn't take hormone replacement seem to have had—on average—a 70% higher relative risk of dementia than women who began HRT around the time of the beginning of menopause). This suggests that there may be a "critical period" during which time taking HRT may have benefits, but if HRT is initiated after that period, it will not have such benefits and may cause harm. This is consistent with research that hormone therapy improves executive and attention processes in postmenopausal women. It is also supported by research upon monkeys that were given ovariectomies to imitate the effect of menopause and then estrogen therapies. This showed replacement treated compared to nontreated monkeys had long term improved prefrontal cortex executive abilities on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test. The relative risk (RR) of breast cancer varies from 1.24 in the WHI study to 1.66 in the Million Women Study, with results differing according to interval between menopause and hormone therapy and methods of hormone replacement. The WHI preliminary results in 2004 found a non-significant trend in the estrogen-alone clinical trial towards a reduced risk of breast cancer and a 2006 update concluded that use of estrogen-only HRT for 7 years does not increase the risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women who have had a hysterectomy. The results of the WHI estrogen-alone trial suggest that the progestin used in the WHI estrogen-plus-progestin trial increased the risk for breast cancer above that associated with estrogen alone. A recent randomized controlled trial recently showed that increased breast cancer risk applied only to those women who take progesterone analogues, but not to those taking bio-identical progesterone itself, nor to hysterectomized women who take unopposed estrogen. Some reports have not found an association of progesterone therapy and breast cancer. The absence of effect in these studies has been suggested to be due to selective prescription to overweight women, or to the very low progesterone serum levels after oral administration leading to a strong tumor inactivation rate. Estrogen prevents the activity of osteoclasts, and improves bone mineral density. Hip fracture is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in older females, and usually does not occur in the setting of osteoporosis. Estrogen is the only medical therapy that has been shown to prevent hip fractures in women that are not osteoporotic, with efficacy superior to bisphosphonates or calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Clinical medical practice changed with two parallel WHI studies of postmenopausal HRT. Prior studies were smaller, and many were of women who electively took hormonal therapy. The WHI studies were the first large, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials of HRT in healthy, postmenopausal women. The WHI estrogen-plus-progestin trial was stopped prematurely in 2002 because preliminary results suggested risks of combined conjugated equine estrogen and progestin exceeded their benefits. The estrogen-alone trial, performed on women who were post hysterectomy, due to the proliferative effect of the hormone on endometrial tissue, did not show such problems and was continued. However, in February 2004 it, too, was halted. While there was a 23% decreased incidence of breast cancer in estrogen only arm, risks of stroke and pulmonary embolism were increased, predominantly in patients who began HRT over the age of 60. The first report on the halted WHI estrogen-plus-progestin study came out in July 2002. It followed over 16 000 women for an average of 5.2 years, half of whom took placebo, while the other half took a combination of progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate and conjugated equine estrogen. The study reported statistically significant increases in rates of breast cancer, coronary heart disease, strokes and pulmonary emboli. The study also found statistically significant decreases in rates of hip fracture and colorectal cancer. "A year after the study was stopped in 2002, an article was published indicating that estrogen plus progestin also increases the risks of dementia." The conclusion of the study was that the HRT combination presented risks that outweighed its measured benefits. The results were almost universally reported as risks and problems associated with HRT in general, rather than with PremPro, the specific proprietary combination of conjugated equine estrogen and progestin studied. After the increased clotting found in the first WHI results was reported in 2002, the number of Prempro prescriptions filled reduced by almost half. An unknown number of women started taking alternatives to Prempro, such as bioidentical hormones. Many women seeking natural remedies have turned to compounding pharmacies, druggists who promise so-called bioidentical hormones that are chemically synthesized but have the same molecular structure as hormones produced by a woman's body. A sharp drop in breast cancer rates was observed following these changes, and held steady in subsequent years. The WHI trial was limited by low adherence, high attrition, inadequate power to detect risks for some outcomes, and evaluation of few regimens. The double blinding limited validity of study results due to its effects on patient exclusion criteria. Patients who were experiencing symptoms of menopause were excluded from the study. As a result, while the average age of menopause is at age 51, study participants were on average 62 years of age. Demographically, the vast majority were Caucasian, and tended to be slightly overweight and former smokers. Bioidentical hormone replacement therapy refers to the use of hormones that are chemically identical to those produced in a woman's body. Some bioidentical hormone therapies are FDA approved. Others are provided in connection with the practices of pharmaceutical compounding and saliva testing to determine, and adjust a woman's hormone levels. The latter two practices are not widely accepted in clinical medicine. Compounding has not demonstrated any benefits and presents risks of uncertain dosing, potency and possible contamination. In addition, saliva testing is of limited utility due to natural fluctuations in hormone levels, and lack of consensus for ideal dosage in humans. Proponents also claim that BHRT can offer advantages beyond those typical of traditional HRT. There is as yet no evidence to dispute with these claims, but also none deemed sufficient to establish them with certainty. The United States Food and Drug Administration has stated that BHRT were expected to present the same risks and benefits of non-bioidentical HRT, but that traditional products have been researched to quantify these risks and benefits, and are produced by manufacturers with stringent purity and potency standards. Menopause is the permanent cessation of menstruation resulting from loss of ovarian follicular activity. Menopause can be divided into early and late transition periods, also known as perimenopause and postmenopause. Each stage is marked by changes in hormonal patterns, which can induce menopausal symptoms. It is possible to induce menopause prematurely by surgically removing the ovary or ovaries (oophorectomy). This is often done as a consequence of ovarian failure, such as ovarian or uterine cancers. The most common side effects of the menopausal transition are: lack of sexual desire or libido, lack of sexual arousal, and vaginal dryness. The modification of women’s physiology can lead to changes in her sexual response, the development of sexual dysfunctions, and changes in her levels of sexual desire.<ref name= "sarrel"> Sarrel, P.M. (2000). Effects of hormone replacement therapy on sexual psychophysiology and behavior in postmenopause. Journal of Women’s Health and Gender-Based Medicine, 9, 25-32 It is commonly perceived that once women near the end of their reproductive years and enter menopause that this equates to the end of her sexual life. However, especially since women today are living one third or more of their lives in a postmenopausal state, maintaining, if not improving, their quality of life, of which their sexuality can be a key determinant, is of importance.. A recent study of sexual activities among women aged 40-69 revealed that 75% of women are sexually active at this age; this indicates that the sexual health and satisfaction of menopausal women are an aspect of sexual health and quality of life that is worthy of attention by health care professionals. A major complaint among postmenopoausal women is decreased libido, and many may seek medical consultation for this. Decrease in other hormones such as the sex hormone-binding globulim (SHBG) and inhibin (A and B) also take place in the postmenopausal period. Testosterone, a hormone more commonly associated with males, is also present in women. It peaks at age 30, but declines with age, so there is little variation across the lifetime and during the menopausal transition.. However, in surgically induced menopause, instead of the levels of estrogens and testosterone slowly declining over time, they decline very sharply, resulting in more severe symptoms. In menopausal women, sexual functioning can impact several dimensions of a woman’s life, including her physical, psychological, and mental well-being. Therefore, it can be appropriate to make use of HRT, especially in women with low or declining quality of life due to sexual difficulties. Current research that has examined the impact of menopause on women’s self-reported sexual satisfaction indicates that 50.3% of women experience some sexual disturbance in one of five domains, and 33.7% experience disturbances in two of the domains. Of these were desire, orgasm, lubrication, and arousal disturbances. With regards to arousal, they found a significant negative association between age and arousal, in that as women aged they were more likely to report lower arousal scores. In the desire and orgasm domains, 38% of women reported a disturbances in their desire, and 17% reported a disturbance in their orgasm capabilities; of the 17%, 14% were premenopausal, 15.2% were postmenopausal and taking a form of HRT, and 22% were postmenopausal not on a form of HRT. Eight percent of women reported disturbances lubricating during sexual activity; 14.3% in the premenopausal group, 30% in the postmenopausal group not using a HRT, and 11.7% among those postmenopausal women using HRT. Lastly, 21% of women reported pain as a disturbance in their sexual satisfaction- the premenopausal group at 14.3%, the postmenopausal women using HRT at 13.3% and the group with the highest rates, similarly to the other results, was the postmenopausal women not taking HRT at 34%. This study concluded that there was a significant decline in sexual function related to menopause in the pain and lubrication domains. The maintenance and improvement of quality of life during the menopausal period is at the core of estrogen and progestin-based hormone therapy. Both HRT and estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) have been shown to enhance sexual desire in a significant percent of women; however, as with all pharmacological treatments, not all women have been responsive, especially those with preexisting sexual difficulties. ERT restores vaginal cells, pH levels, and blood flow to the vagina, all of which are associated with the onset of menopause. Dyspareunia (due to vaginal dryness) appears to be the most responsive component of menopausal women’s sexuality to ERT. It also has been shown to have positive effects on the urinary tract and atrophy and may initially improve libido or sexual sensitivity. Other improvements in areas such as sexual desire, arousal, fantasies, and frequency of coitus and orgasm have also been noted. However, the effectiveness of ERT has been shown to decline in some women after long-term use. A number of studies have found that the combined effects of estrogen/androgen replacement therapy can increase a woman’s motivational aspects of sexual behaviour over and above what can be achieved with estrogen therapy alone. Findings on a relatively new form of HRT called tibolone- a synthetic steroid with estrogenic, androgenic, and progestogenic properties- suggest that it has the ability to improve mood, libido, and somatic symptoms of surgically menopausal women to a greater degree than ERT. In various placebo-controlled studies, improvements in vasomotor symptoms, emotional reactions, sleep disturbances, somatic symptoms, and sexual desire have been observed. However, while this is and has been available in Europe for almost two decades, this has not been approved for use in North America at this point. Cross-sex hormone treatment is an integral component in the medical treatment of transsexuals, as the hormones can lead to decreasing the dichotomy between an individual's body and their gender identity. However, it is possible to speculate the outcomes of these therapies on transsexual people based on the knowledge of the current effects of gonadal hormones on sexual functioning in natural men and women.<ref name= "klein"> Klein, C., & Gorzalka, B.B. (2009). Sexual functioning in transsexuals following hormone therapy and genital surgery: A review. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 6(11), 2922-2939. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2009.01370.x Firstly, if one is to decrease testosterone in MtF transsexuals, it is likely that sexual desire and arousal would be inhibited; alternatively, if high doses of estrogen negatively impact sexual desire, which has been found in some research with natal women, it is hypothesized that combining androgens with high levels of estrogen would intensify this outcome. Unfortunately, to date there haven’t been any randomized clinical trials looking at the relationship between type and dose of cross-sex hormone therapy, so the relationship between them remains unclear. Typically, the estrogens given to MtF transsexuals were 2-3 times higher than the recommended dose for HRT in postmenopausal women. While pharmokinetic studies indicate that by taking these increased doses it may lead to a higher boost in plasma estradiol levels; however, since the long-term side effects haven’t been studied, the safety of this route is unclear. As with any pharmacological or hormone treatment, there are potential side effects, which in the case of hormone therapy include changes in sexual functioning. These have the ability to significantly impact sexual functioning, either directly or indirectly through the various side effects, such as cerebrovascular disorders, obesity, and mood fluctuations. In addition, some research has found an onset of diabetes following feminizing hormone therapy, which impairs sexual response. Whatever route an individual and his or her doctor choose to take, it is important to consider both the medical risks of hormone therapy as well as the psychological needs of the patient. The first clinical usage of hormone replacement therapy in the setting of menopause began in the 1950s, with the administered estrogen purified from the urine of pregnant mares. From that time until 1975, estrogen was administered without supplemental progesterone or progestin. A study from Kaiser Permanente by Dr. Harry Ziel demonstrated that in the absence of progesterone, patients were at increased risk of endometrial cancer with unopposed estrogen therapy. After this, progestin was supplemented in women who had not received surgicalhysterectomy, to reduce the incidence of endometrial hyperplasia and cancer. This was followed by the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) in 2002. However, the arm of the WHI receiving combined Estrogen and Progesterone therapy was closed prematurely by its Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) due to perceived health risks, although the trial arm was stopped only a full year after the data suggesting increased risk became manifest. In 2004, the arm of the WHI in which post-hysterectomy patients were being treated with estrogen alone was also closed by the DMC. HRT is available in various forms. It generally provides low dosages of one or more estrogens, and often also provides either progesterone or a chemical analogue, called a progestin. Testosterone may also be included. In women who have had a hysterectomy, an estrogen is usually given without any progesterone, a therapy referred to as "unopposed estrogen therapy". HRT may be delivered to the body via patches, tablets, creams, troches, IUDs, vaginal rings, gels or, more rarely, by injection. For example, vaginally administered estrogens include those given by intravaginal tablets, creams and rings, and can have more effect on atrophic vaginitis with fewer systemic effects than estrogens delivered by other means. Dosage is often varied cyclically to more closely mimic the ovarian hormone cycle, with estrogens taken daily and progesterone or progestins taken for about two weeks every month or two; a method called "cyclic HRT" or "sequentially combined HRT" (abbreviated scHRT). An alternate method, a constant dosage with both types of hormones taken daily, is called "continuous combined HRT" or ccHRT, and is a more recent innovation. Sometimes an androgen, generally testosterone, is added to treat diminished libido. It may also treat reduced energy and help reduce osteoporosis after menopause. HRT is often given as a short-term relief (often one or two years, usually less than five) from menopausal symptoms (hot flushes, irregular menstruation, fat redistribution, etc.). Younger women with premature ovarian failure or surgical menopause may use hormone replacement therapy for many years, until the age that natural menopause would be expected to occur. Formulations of estradiol include: In addition, there are many formulations of estradiol combined with one of various progestins, such as norethisterone (in Activelle), levonorgestrel, medroxyprogesterone, dienogest or drospirenone. 
