 Hypermagnesemia is an electrolyte disturbance in which there is an abnormally elevated level of magnesium in the blood. Usually this results in excess of magnesium in the body. Hypermagnesemia occurs rarely because the kidney is very effective in excreting excess magnesium. It usually develops only in people with kidney failure who are given magnesium salts or who take drugs that contain magnesium (e.g. some antacids and laxatives). It is usually concurrent with hypocalcemia and/or hyperkalemia. For a detailed description of magnesium homeostasis and metabolism see hypomagnesemia. Arrhythmia and asystole are possible cardiac complications of hypermagnesemia. Magnesium acts as physiologic calcium blocker, which results in electrical conduction abnormalities. Clinical consequences related to serum concentration: Note that the therapeutic range for the prevention of the pre-eclampsic uterine contractions is: 4.0-7.0 mEq/L. As per Lu and Nightingale, serum Mg<sup>2+</sup> concentrations associated with maternal toxicity (also neonate depression - hypotonia and low Apgar scores) are: An evaluation of 515 patients on hemodialysis demonstrated that serum magnesium concentration lower than 2.77 mg/dL (1.14 mmol/L) is a significant predictor for increased all-cause mortality. While the mean serum magnesium concentration of this study population (2.77 mg/dL or 1.14 mmol/L) would be considered indicative of mild hypermagnesemia in the healthy population, serum magnesium concentrations in hemodialysis patients may be optimal at a higher concentration, in view of better survival under hemodialysis conditions, without causing severe and symptomatic hypermagnesemia.<ref name= Ishimura2007 > Consistently, lower magnesium levels were significantly associated with the presence of vascular calcification of the hand arteries in a study investigating 390 nondiabetic hemodialysis patients. These results suggest that higher serum magnesium concentrations may play an important protective role in the development of vascular calcification in hemodialysis patients.<ref name= Ishimura2007a > Results from a longitudinal study with end-stage renal disease patients suggest that hypermagnesemia may retard the development of arterial calcifications in end-stage renal disease.<ref name= Meema1987 > Significantly lower values of carotid intima-media thickness and aortic pulse wave velocity values, which are surrogate markers for vascular calcification, were observed in chronic kidney disease patients with high serum magnesium levels (0.90-1.32 mmol/L or 2.18-3.21 mg/dL) indicating a lower arteriosclerotic burden associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular events and mortality.<ref name= Salem2012 > Consequently, CKD patients with mildly elevated magnesium levels could have a survival advantage over those with lower magnesium levels.<ref name= Massy2012 > Magnesium status depends on three organs: uptake in the intestine, storage in the bone and excretion in the kidneys. Hypermagnesemia is therefore often due to problems in these organs, mostly intestine or kidney.<ref name= Jahnen-Dechent2012 > Prevention of hypermagnesemia usually is possible. In mild cases, withdrawing magnesium supplementation is often sufficient. In more severe cases the following treatments are used: Definitive treatment of hypermagnesemia requires increasing renal magnesium excretion through: 
