 International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) provided by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), for medical coding and reporting in the United States. The ICD-10-CM is a morbidity classification for classifying diagnoses and reason for visits in all American health care settings. The ICD-10-CM is based on the ICD-10, the statistical classification of disease published by the World Health Organization (WHO) which replaces ICD-9. General rules for use of the guidelines. They are incorporated within the ICD-10-CM as instructional notes. ICD-10-CM Diagnosis codes are to be used and reported at their highest number of digits available.They are composed of codes with 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 digits. Three digits are used as the heading of a category of codes that may be further subdivided by the use of fourth and/or fifth digits (preceded by a decimal, i.e. A00.1 Cholera due to Vibrio cholerae 01, biovar eltor), which provides greater detail. A code is invalid if it has not been coded to the full number of characters required for that code, including the 7th character, if applicable. Some codes require the use of a seventh character for codes in chapters M, O, R, S, T, V, W, X, Y. If there are fewer than six characters in the code the placeholder "x" is used to ensure that the seventh character is always in the seventh position. Example S03.4xxA Sprain of jaw, initial encounter. ICD-10-CM has two types of excludes notes. This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following broad groups of neoplasms: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: Note: CODES FROM THIS CHAPTER ARE FOR USE ONLY ON MATERNAL RECORDS, NEVER ON NEWBORN RECORDSThis chapter contains the following blocks: NOTE: CODES FROM THIS CHAPTER ARE FOR USE ON NEWBORN RECORDS ONLY, NEVER ON MATERNAL RECORDSThis chapter contains the following blocks: Note: CODES FROM THIS CHAPTER ARE NOT FOR USE ON MATERNAL OR FETAL RECORDS This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: This chapter contains the following blocks: The appropriate 7th character is to be added to each code from category. 7th character 0 is for single gestations and multiple gestations where the fetus is unspecified. 7th characters 1 through 9 are for cases of multiple gestations to identify the fetus for which the code applies. A fracture not designated as open or closed should be coded to closed A fracture not designated as open or closed should be coded to closedThe open fracture designations are based on the Gustilo open fracture classification A fracture not designated as open or closed should be coded to closed 
