 In sports therapy, an ice bath or sometimes a cold-water immersion or cold therapy is a training regimen usually following a period of intense exercise in which a substantial part of a human body is immersed in a bath of ice or ice-water for a limited duration. While it is becoming increasingly popular and accepted among athletes in a variety of sports, the method is controversial and potentially dangerous with little solid scientific evidence to support or refute its usefulness or to understand its method of operation within the body, although there is speculation about processes within the body regarding vasoconstriction. In medicine, the practice would be classified as cryotherapy which uses low temperatures as medical therapy. There have been traditions of people ice swimming in the middle of winter on a lake for short stretches, sometimes as part of a Polar Bear Club. Sometimes people taking short swims for thirty seconds or so have felt invigorated afterwards. The Coney Island Polar Bear Club was founded in 1903. A Polar Bear member explained: In the 1890s, Russian immigrant Professor Louis Sugarman of Little Falls, NY brought his practice of ice bathing to the United States. He attracted worldwide attention for his daily plunge in the Mohawk River, even when the thermostat hit 23 below zero, earning him the nickname "the human polar bear". In 1899, an Iowa woman filed for divorce from her husband because he had forced her to undergo ice baths. There has been a tradition in American football of pouring a large bucket of ice water on the winning coach as a victory celebration. And physical therapists have applied ice packs to selected areas of the body to prevent swelling. Until recently, however, bathing in ice was seen as unusual. One account suggested that ice bath therapy did not become popular until 2002, when marathon runner Paula Radcliffe won the championship in Europe and attributed her victory to its use. She reportedly said "It's absolute agony, and I dread it, but it allows my body to recover so much more quickly." She reported taking ice baths before racing and preferred her pre-race bath temperature to be "very cold." After the Radcliffe comment, the technique has grown in popularity. It is gaining in popularity among athletes, such that some athletes "swear by it" but other accounts suggest it may be a fad. It has been used by athletes such as A. J. Soares and Olympic swimmer Michael Phelps as well as other celebrity endorsers and is getting to become "common practice" among athletes from different sports, including American football, association football (soccer), long distance running, rugby, tennis, volleyball, and other sports. There was a report that sports equipment manufacturers are considering different designs for ice baths. There are indications that ice baths may be gaining popularity with groups outside sports, such as dance. The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that some Radio City Rockettes, a precision dance company performing in New York City, use ice baths after a long day of performing as a way to "unwind" and cope with "aches and pains." One report suggested that entertainer Madonna used ice baths after her performances. And there are indications that use of ice baths is spreading to amateur sports, such as high school football. Ice baths are a part of a broader phenomenon known as cryotherapy––the Greek word cryo (κρυο) means cold––which describes a variety of treatments when cold temperatures are used therapeutically. Cyrotherapy includes procedures where a person is placed in a room with "cold, dry air at temperatures as low as −135 °C" for short periods of time, and which has been used in hospitals in Poland as well as a center in London to treat not only muscular ailments, but psychological problems such as depression. Basketball player Manny Harris reportedly used a Cryon-X machine featuring extreme low temperatures around minus 166 degrees Fahrenheit, but used it with wet socks resulting in a serious freezer burn. Occasionally ice baths have been an ill-advised treatment of fever in young children, but that doctors were counseled not to use this technique because of the risk of hypothermia. Ice baths have been suggested as a way to prevent muscle soreness after shoveling snow. In addition, there have been instances of ice bathing as an extreme bodily test by persons vying for an endurance record, such as Dutch Iceman Wim Hof, and Chinese record-holders Chen Kecai and Jin Songhao. These people have spent more than an hour and a half submerged in an ice bath, and survived. It is done by standing or sitting in a bucket or bath of icy water. One writer advised: "don't overdo it." Wearing rubberized "dive booties" on the feet (to protect toes) as well as rubber briefs to warm the midsection have been recommended. While there are different types of ice baths, a writer described one arrangement: Champion weightlifter Karyn Marshall, who won the world women's weightlifting championship in 1987, described what it was like to take an ice bath after a day of competition at the CrossFit Games in 2011 in Los Angeles: One report suggested that if ice water is circulating, it's even colder such that the water will be colder than measured by a thermometer, and that athletes should avoid overexposure. Physical therapist Nikki Kimball explained a way to make the bath more endurable: Accounts differ whether it is best to follow the ice bath with a hot shower; two accounts suggested that a hot shower followed by a massage would be helpful, but other reports counsel against such a practice. There are reports that some athletes use this technique, sometimes known as contrast water therapy or contrast bath therapy, in which cold water and warmer water are alternated. One method of doing this was to have two tubs––one cold (10–15 degrees Celsius) and another hot (37–40 degrees Celsius)––and to do one minute in the cold tub followed by two minutes in a hot tub, and to repeat this procedure three times. The temperature can vary, but is usually in the range of 50–59 degrees Fahrenheit or between 12 and 15 degrees Celsius. Some athletes wear booties to keep their toes warm or rubberized coverings around their midsection while immersed. Some drink a warm beverage such as tea. One report suggested that "ten minutes immersed in 15 degree Celsius water" was sufficient. Accounts vary about how long to be immersed and how often to do them. One adviser suggested that an athlete should take ten two-minute ice bath treatments over a two-week period.<ref name="twsM46" /> One account suggested immersion times should be between ten and twenty minutes.<ref name="twsAugN27" /> Another suggested that immersion run from five to ten minutes, and sometimes to twenty minutes.<ref name="twsAugN31" /> There were no sources advocating being immersed for longer than twenty minutes. Several sources suggest that cold baths (60–75 degrees Fahrenheit) were preferable to ice baths. Physiotherapist Tony Wilson of the University of Southampton said that extremely cold temperatures were unnecessary and a "cold bath" would be just as effective as an ice bath.<ref name="twsM46" /> Another agreed that a mere cold bath is preferable to ice baths which are "unnecessary."<ref name="twsAugN31" /> A third report suggested that cool water (60–75 degrees Fahrenheit) was just as good as cold water (54–60 degrees Fahrenheit) and that eight to ten minutes should be sufficient time, and warned against exceeding ten minutes.<ref name="twsAugN32" /> There is theoretical speculation, although unproved, about how the ice bath technique might operate,<ref name="twsAugN31" /> as well as differing accounts about how the technique is supposed to help the human body. A common theme is that the cold prompts the body to recover faster from an intense period of activity. According to several accounts, the cold in the ice bath signals temperature receptors to alert the brain to "withdraw blood to the body's core".<ref name="twsM46" /> According to another account, after five to ten minutes, the "icy cold water causes your blood vessels to tighten and drains the blood out of your legs."<ref name="twsAugN14" /><ref name="twsAugN31" /><ref name="twsAugN23" /> Another report suggested that it causes metabolic activity to slow.<ref name="twsAugN31" /> After getting out of the ice bath, the blood is pumped "vigorously" back to tissues "stimulating oxygen and nutrient supply to areas that need revitalising," according to several assessments,<ref name="twsM46" /><ref name="tws2octY112" /> and another suggests that blood flow is speeded up,<ref name="twsAugN31" /> sometimes described as a "blood rush."<ref name="twsAugN41" /> A report along these same lines suggested that the benefit came from after the ice bath with "increased blood flow" bringing fresh nutrients to an "inflamed, injured area" which helps the tissues heal.<ref name="twsM52" /> A slightly different explanation was that cold causes the diameters of blood vessels to contract during the period of immersion in the ice water, meaning that more toxins were pumped out of the area, similar to a massage.<ref name="twsM46" /> And blood is a way to bring oxygen to the cells as well as remove waste products from muscular exertion, particularly lactic acid.<ref name="twsAugN14" /> Here is one description of how it is believed to work: Ice baths are generally believed to be a way to help the body recover from a vigorous workout, with one account suggesting helpful effects not only for muscles, but for tendons, bones, nerves, and other tissues as well. An advantage cited is that cold-water immersion is a more "efficient means of cooling large groups of muscles simultaneously" and helps lead to "longer lasting changes in deep tissues."<ref name="twsAugN27" /> A second report echoed this view and suggested that "immersion allows controlled, even constriction around all muscles." Ice baths have been a source of medical treatment when a person is suffering from heat illness, and when this happens, sufferers are urged to get into an air conditioned room quickly or get into an ice bath. Benefits are speculative but include the following: The consensus view is that there is little solid scientific research to support a case that ice baths are either beneficial or detrimental for athletes.<ref name="twsM36" /><ref name="twsM46" /><ref name="twsAugN31" /> Professor Kenneth L. Knight of Brigham Young University said there is no evidence to either support or refute the claim that ice-bath treatments, or cryotherapy methods in general, reduces inflammation.<ref name="twsM36" /> Runner's World.com executive editor Mark Remy believes that ice-bath treatments are "bunk" opining that it is an "elaborate practical joke being played on runners." Physiotherapist Chris Bleakley of the University of Ulster reported that there are "no high-level scientific studies that say this is good for the body" although he admitted that athletes had been reporting positive results,<ref name="twsM46" /> and that there is considerable anecdotal evidence from athletes that it makes them "feel better."<ref name="twsAugN23" /> In contrast, one report suggested that there was scientific research showing that ice baths promote recovery, but no specific studies were cited.<ref name="twsAugN27" /> There have been smaller-scale studies which either indicate no benefit or a detrimental effect, or that offer "inconclusive or contradictory findings."<ref name="twsAugN31" /> A report in The New York Times suggested that there had been "little study" of cold therapy versus other treatment regimens such as compression sleeves or ibuprofen.<ref name="tws2octY311" /> There have been reports that suggest that cryotherapy used before training can reduce the amount of lactic acid produced by the muscles and "speed up its removal" afterwards. A 2012 systemic database review was conducted of either fourteen or seventeen existing studies of 366 subjects which compared cold-water immersion following exercise with doing nothing or resting as a way to prevent subsequent muscle soreness. Study variables included the level of soreness, cold water immersion versus no treatment, intensity and duration of exercise, time between exercise and measurement of soreness, and other variables. The authors found evidence that cold water immersion had a slight effect on reducing soreness, not immediately after exercise but at intervals of up to 96 hours after exercise, and that it lowered levels of fatigue and sped up physical recovery, although they noted that these studies did not examine other variables such as possible negative effects on the body. The authors concluded that high quality research was required.<ref name="Cochrane" /> A study by Australian researchers, publishing in the British Journal of Sports Medicine on a small sample size, suggested that ice bath therapy may "do more harm than good."<ref name="twsAugN31" /> The team asked 40 volunteers to undergo leg exercises and gave half ice baths and the other half a dip in tepid water. Researchers measured pain levels, swelling, performance in a "hopping test" and blood chemicals which might indicate damage to muscles, and found no statistically important differences between the two groups, except that the ice therapy treated volunteers experienced more muscular pain,<ref name="twsM42" /> specifically in the legs.<ref name="twsAugN31" /> The study found that: One study in 2008 in the International Journal of Sports Medicine suggested that cold water immersion and contrast water therapy might help in situations where athletes engaged in "high intensity efforts on successive days", such as weightlifters in a multi-day competition.<ref name="twsAugN31" /> Researchers studied cyclists during a week of intense training and found that they performed better with these methods than complete rest or hot water baths. A study in 2007 reported in the Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research found that contrast water therapy delayed the onset of muscle soreness after "intense leg press exercise" and found "faster restoration of strength and power in athletes" who used this therapy instead of a merely "passive recovery."<ref name="twsAugN31" /> This study suggested that ice baths could help top athletes recover faster during a peak competition but that such methods should not be used during training since it limits the "growth and strengthening of muscle fibers." The authors of the study, including physiologist Jonathan Leeder, counseled against ice bath treatments during training.<ref name="twsAugN35" /> 
