 Idiopathic pure sudomotor failure (IPSF) is the most common cause of a rare disorder know as acquired idiopathic generalized anhidrosis (AIGA) a clinical syndrome characterized by generalized decrease or absence of sweating without other autonomic and somatic nervous dysfunctions and without persistent organic cutaneous lesions. The term IPSF was first introduced in 1994 after researchers at Saitama Medical School, Japan speculated that the primary lesion sites in patients were within cholinergic receptors of the sweat glands. The term IPSF represent a distinct subgroup of AIGA without sudomotor neuropathy or sweat gland failure. The overwhelming majority of reported AIGA patients are Japanese, but whether AIGA is truly rare in whites or has been simply underreported by Western physicians remains unclear. AIGA is most prevalent among young men. In a 64 case review of the liturature 58 reported cases were males and 6 female, with a mean age of onset at 28 ± 11 years. Cholinergic urticaria or sharp pain over the entire body induced by elevated body temperature was reported in 32 cases (50%). Of 28 cases tested, 12 (43%) displayed elevated serum IgE levels. Skin biopsy was performed in 53 cases, with normal findings in 20 cases (38%), and cellular infiltrates in sweat glands or ducts in 23 cases (43%). Intracutaneous injection of pilocarpine (direct stimulant of sweat glands) is know to evoke no sweat response, indicating that lesions in are on the post-synaptic side of the nerve-sweat gland junction. Similar findings also suggest that both sudomotor nerve fibers and sweat glands remain intact. The proposed pathomechanisms of idiopathic pure sudomotor failure include; Novel treatments for AIGA are required as current treatment of AIGA almost always comprises steroid pulse therapy or high-dose oral steroids. Treatment for AIGA is not consistently effective, and much remains unclear regarding the reasons for recurrent anhidrosis. The efficacy of steroid treatment and recurrence of anhidrosis are confirmed using the minor test. 
