 Impulse control disorder or ICD is a class of psychiatric disorders characterized by impulsivity – failure to resist a temptation, urge or impulse that may harm oneself or others. Many psychiatric disorders feature impulsivity, including substance-related disorders, paraphilias, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, antisocial personality disorder, conduct disorder, schizophrenia and mood disorders. The revised fourth edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-IV-TR) includes the category, "impulse control disorders not elsewhere classified", which consists of kleptomania, pathological gambling, pyromania (fire-starting), trichotillomania (a compulsion to pull one's hair out), intermittent explosive disorder, and "impulse control disorders not otherwise specified". Other disorders such as, dermatillomania (compulsive skin picking), compulsive buying and compulsive non-paraphilic sexual behaviour have been proposed for inclusion in the category. Five behavioural stages characterize impulsivity: an impulse, growing tension, pleasure from acting, relief from the urge and finally guilt (which may or may not arise).<ref name= Wright> Disorders characterised by impulsivity that are not categorised elsewhere in the DSM-IV-TR are included in the category "Impulse control disorders not elsewhere classified": Pathological gambling is an impulse control disorder characterized by maladaptive and re-current episodes of gambling that is significantly disruptive to the individual's familial and personal life.According to studies carried out until 2006, the prevalence of Pathological Gambling in adults was found to be between 1%-3% in the U.S., with the problem usually starting in adolescence with prevalence of about 4%-7%. Trichotillomania is a condition where an individual has an overwhelming urge to pluck out bodily hair. Common areas include head, eyebrows, eyelashes and hands. People with trichotillomania feel brief moments of relief after their hair plucking episodes, which triggers a greater urge to continue plucking. The prevalence of trichotillomania in females in the United States is estimated at 3.4%, about double that in males (1.5%). 0.6% of such cases fully meet the criteria of trichtillomania, whereas the prevalence of non-clinically significant hair-pulling behaviour is about up to 15.3%. Pyromania is characterized by impulsive and repetitive urges to deliberately start fires.Because of its nature, the number of studies performed for fire-setting are understandably very few. However studies done on children and adolescents suffering from pyromania have reported its prevalence to be between 2.4%-3.5% in the United States. It has also been observed that the incidence of fire-setting is more common in juvenile and teenage boys than girls of the same age. Intermittent explosive disorder or IED is a clinical condition of experiencing recurrent aggressive episodes that are out of proportion of any given stressor.Earlier studies reported a prevalence rate between 1%-2% in a clinical setting, however a study done by Coccaro and colleagues in 2004 had reported about 11.1% lifetime prevalence and 3.2% one month prevalence in a sample of a moderate number of individuals (n=253). Based on the study, Coccaro and colleagues estimated the prevalence of IED in 1.4 million individuals in the US and 10 million with lifetime IED. Kleptomania is characterized by an impulsive urge to steal purely for the sake of gratification.In the U.S. the presence of kleptomania is although unknown but has been estimated at 6 per 1000 individuals. Kleptomania is also thought to be the cause of 5% of annual shoplifting in the U.S. In case where this is true, then as much as about 100,000 arrests are made in the U.S. annually due to kleptomaniac behavior. Additionally, other disorders not specifically listed in this category are often classed as impulsivity disorders. These include: Sexual compulsion includes an increased urge in sexual behaviour and thoughts. This compulsion may also lead to several consequences in the individual's life.There has not yet been a determined estimate of its prevalence due to the secretiveness of the disorder. However, research conducted in early 1990s in the United States gave prevalence estimates between 5%-6% in the U.S. population, with male cases being higher than female. Pathologic skin picking or dermatillomania includes an uncontrollable urge to pick one's skin in order to seek gratification. Skin picking may affect as many as 1 in 20 people, and affect more women than men. It is also linked to other psychological disorders such as anxiety or depression. People who suffer from skin picking disorder may feel relief during or after their picking episode. However, it is often followed by feeling of shame and guilt. The disorder of Internet addiction has only recently been taken into consideration and has been added as a form of ICD. It is characterized by excessive and damaging usage of Internet with increased amount of time spent chatting, web-surfing, gambling, shopping or exploring pornographic web-sites. Excessive and problematic Internet use has been reported across all ages, social, economical and education range. Although initially stereotyped only in males, increasing rates have been also observed in females. However, no epidemiological study has been conducted yet to understand its prevalence. Compulsive shopping or buying is characterized by a frequent irresistible urge to shop even if buying is not needed and\or cannot be afforded. Studies have reported the prevalence of Compulsive buying in the U.S. population to be between 2%-8% in the general adult population, with 80%-90% of these cases being females. The onset is believed to occur in late teens or early twenties and the disorder is believed to be generally chronic. Five behavioural stages can prove to be the symptoms of ICD: an impulse, growing tension, pleasure from acting, relief from the urge and finally guilt which may or may not arise. People who have an impulse control disorder cannot resist the urge to do something harmful to themselves or others around them. ICD varies from other disorders because its primary feature is the incapability to control impulses. Although not alone in accounting for the disorder, dopamine agonists used for the treatment of Parkinson's disease are known to cause impulse control disorder. The most common dopamine agonists are pramipexole, pergolide, and ropinirole and these are known to cause the manifestation of Impulse Control Disorder (ICD). Claassen and colleagues (2011) have proposed that these dopamine agonists work by increasing the risk-taking behaviour in Parkinson's disease patients which might be the potential cause of the development of ICD in them. Impulse control disorders have two treatment options: psychosocial and pharmacological. Treatment methodology is informed by the presence of comorbid conditions. This approach to the treatment if ICD results from the late 20th century discovery of the role of serotoninergic system in the disorders that are characterized by poor impulse control. The therapeutic treatment for ICD also stems from the fact that there is some evidence indicating the association of low cerebral serotonin function and excessive impulsiveness. The researchers in support of the pharmaceutical approach have reported that the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants has shown improvement in impulsive and aggressive patients. In the case of pathological gambling, along with fluvoxamine, clomipramine has also been shown effective in the treatment, with reducing the problems of pathological gambling in a subject by up to 90%. Whereas in trichollomania, the use of clomipramine has again been found to be effective, fluoxetine has not produced consistent positive results. Fluoxetine however has produced positive results in the treatment of the pathological skin picking disorder, The use of anti-depressants has also shown satisfactory results in the treatments of patients of compulsive buying and binge eating, as well as kleptomaniac patients.The use of lithium carbonate has also been found somewhat effective in the treatment of gambling and trichotillomania. The psychosocial approach to the treatment of ICDs includes Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) which has been reported to have positive results in the case of treatment of Pathological gambling and sexual addiction. A 2007 review by the University of Calgary of published literature on the usage of CBT for the treatment of different impulse control disorders, concluded that there is general consensus that cognitive-behavioural therapies offer an effective intervention model. According to research, the late complications of Parkinson's disease may include a range of impulse control disorders, including eating, buying, compulsive gambling and sexual behavior. One study found that 13.6% of Parkinson's patients exhibited at least one form of ICD. A relation between OCD and SUD has been proposed by Eisen and Rasmussen (1989) where 6% of their SUD patients also fell into the category of OCD. Similarly Friedman et all (2000) found a statistically significant difference in the rate of occurrence of OCD in opiate addicts compared to the rate of occurrence in general population. There has been found an overlap between Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD), Impulse Control Disorder (ICD) and Substance Abuse (SUD). Few of the overlapping areas are mentioned and described below: According to a recent study done by Schmidt et all (2012), Impulse Control Disorder occurs commonly in Bariatric surgery patients. The most common ICDs observed were “pathological skin picking, compulsive buying disorder, and intermittent explosive”. However kleptomania has also been reported as one of the most common disorders for people with eating disorder. There was also an association present between depression and ICD. This relation between ICD and obesity has also been observed by Joutsa and colleagues from University of Cambridge (2012) and by Lejoveux and colleagues (2002) who reported the presence of ICD in 29% of their subjects. There is a significant co-occurrence of Pathological Gambling (an ICD) and Anti-Social Personality Disorder, and is suggested to be caused partly by their common "genetic vulnerability". The degree of heritability to ICD is similar to other psychiatric disorders including substance abuse disorder. There has also been found a genetic factor to the development of ICD just as there is for substance abuse disorder. The risk for subclinical PG in a population is accounted for by the risk of alcohol dependence by about 12-20% genetic and 3-8% environmental factors. An association between ICD and Bipolar I Disorder has also been found. In a study done by Karakus and Tamam (2011) the most common of the ICDs in patients with Bipolar I Disorder includes “pathologic skin picking, followed by compulsive buying, intermittent explosive disorder, and trichotillomania”. However no instances of pyromania or compulsive sexual behaviours were found in the study. Episodes of depression and alcohol abuse are found out to be significantly higher in ICD patients than in non-ICD patients. According to findings, presence of ICD causes a greater instance of alcohol abuse and suicidal attempts in Bipolar I disorder patients. Although impulsivity is one of the three main characteristics of ADHD, evidence suggests that the behavioural problems related to the disorder (e.g. fire starting, vandalising, binge eating) also fall under an impulse control disorder. 
