 An inferior vena cava filter (IVC filter) is a type of vascular filter, a medical device that is implanted by interventional radiologists or vascular surgeons into the inferior vena cava to presumably prevent life-threatening pulmonary emboli (PEs). Their effectiveness and safety profile is not well established, and in general, they are only recommended in some high-risk scenarios. In 2012, the American College of Chest Physicians recommended IVC filters for those with contraindications to anticoagulation who either have acute PE or acute proximal (above the knee) deep vein thrombosis (DVT). In those with initial acute proximal DVT or acute PE who had IVC filters placed instead of anticoagulation, and who have their risk of bleeding resolve, the American College of Chest Physicians suggested, in 2012, that they receive a standard course of anticoagulation. While IVC filters are associated with a long term risk of DVT, they are not, alone, reason enough to maintain extended anticoagulation. IVC filters are placed endovascularly, meaning that they are inserted via the blood vessels. Historically, IVC filters were placed surgically, but with modern filters that can be compressed into much thinner catheters, access to the venous system can be obtained via the femoral vein (the large vein in the groin), the internal jugular vein (the large vein in the neck) or the arm veins with one design. Choice of route depends mainly on the number and location of any blood clot within the venous system. To place the filter, a catheter is guided into the IVC using fluoroscopic guidance, then the filter is pushed through the catheter and deployed into the desired location, usually just below the junction of the IVC and the lowest renal vein. Review of prior cross-sectional imaging or a venogram of the IVC is performed before deploying the filter to assess for potential anatomic variations, thrombi within the IVC, or areas of stenoses, as well as to estimate the diameter of the IVC. Rarely, ultrasound-guided placement is preferred in the setting of contrast allergy, renal insufficiency, and when patient immobility is desired. The size of the IVC may affect which filter is deployed, as some (such as the Birds Nest) are approved to accommodate larger cavae. There are situations where the filter is placed above the renal veins (e.g. pregnant patients or women of childbearing age, renal or gonadal vein thromboses, etc.). Also, if there is duplication of the IVC, the filter is placed above the confluence of the two IVCs or a filter can be placed within each IVC. While the ability to retrieve a filter does exist for many models, it cannot be guaranteed that all cases of filter placement will allow for, or be indicated for retrieval. Thus, the requirements and indications for permanent placement of filters is used to decide on when to use both permanent and temporary IVC filters. Long-term risk factors must be considered as well, to include life expectancy of more than six months following insertion, and the ability of the patient to comply with anticoagulation therapy.The decision to use a filter that is temporary vs permanent basically is tied to the expected duration of time that protection is needed to prevent Pulmonary Emboli from passing to the heart and lungs. One such guideline is outlined below: While many studies have been done on the efficacy of Vena Cava filters, there still have not been any major studies done on the actual placement and removal of the filters regarding standard guidelines. Which is why the Society of Interventional Radiology created a multidisciplinary panel that developed the following guidelines to see if someone qualifies for implantation: These are patients that should strongly consider having IVC filter placement, as they are at greatest risk of pulmonary embolus. This is a maybe category; normally it represents patients who could benefit from an IVC filter, but may be just fine without one as well. These are usually very controversial reasons to do an IVC filter, and most radiologists and doctors generally will not recommend an IVC filter if other options are available instead. There is no current published data confirming the benefit of removing an IVC. Because of this, the Society of Interventional Radiology created a multidisciplinary panel that developed the following guidelines to see if someone qualifies for removal: The main function of a vena cava filter is to prevent death from massive pulmonary emboli. Long-term clinical follow-up studies have shown that this is accomplished in 96% of cases having a standard stainless-steel Greenfield filter. The FDA has recently (8/9/2010) released an Initial Communication on the Risk and Adverse events associated with Long Term use of an inferior vena cava filter. Over a period of about 5 years, they identify 921 events. While not the majority of cases, that number still represents a statistical significance of the use of long-term IVC's. Of these IVC filter side effects, 328 involved device migration, 146 involved embolizations after detachment of device components, 70 involved perforation of the IVC, and 56 involved filter fracture. Much of the medical community believes that this large number of adverse events is related to the heart filter remaining in place for longer than necessary. Common issues relating to failure, to include death (the other 4% of cases) include: While the side effects are not common (less than 10-20% of patients), many do report issues stemming from the placement, and complication of the IVC while inside of the body. Numerous small published articles and case studies report describer similar problems to the above. Most commonly: Even though the cases above are the exception, and not the rule, most Radiologists object to doing 'prophylactic' filter insertions in patients who do not have thromboembolic diseases. For the most part, interventional radiologists would rather start the patient on anticoagulants, than use an IVC, even if requested or referred via a doctor. Most IVC filters are made of non-ferromagnetic materials; however, there are a few that are weakly ferromagnetic.3 Due to this, IVC filters can fall under the MRI Safe and MRI Conditional categories. Rarely will one find an MRI Not Safe IVC filter, as most of the steel, and other ferromagnetic material devices have been discontinued via the FDA. IVC filters are attached to the vena cava via hooks on their ends. Some are compression springs, which compress outward onto the side wall of the vena cava; however, they still have small hooks that retain their location. These hooks aid in the anchoring and healing process, as they allow the tissues to ingrow around them, securing the IVC in place. It is unlikely, then, after 4 to 6 weeks of healing, that an MRI of 1.5 tesla, up to 3 tesla, will cause any level of dislodging to occur for the IVC filter. Studies of MR examination of both animals and humans with implanted IVC filters have thus far not reported complications or symptomatic filter displacement. Several animal studies have even used “real-time” MR for the placement of IVC filters to check for rotation, sheering, and other artifacts, and have thus far turned up no results. As part of the routing survey for MRI studies, patients who have IVC filters will often need verification from the doctor, or medical records, to state that the IVC is safe for the MRI. Most patients with weakly or non-safe ferromagnetic implants will be given a card, which they keep on their person at all time, which can help isolate if it is safe to do an MRI. For patients who have been denied MRI scans for safety reasons, doctors usually recommend the CT scan with contrast as an alternative. Most IVC filters that have been tested have been labeled as “MR safe”; the remainder of IVC filters that have been tested are “MR conditional.” Patients who have been treated with nonferromagnetic IVC filters can undergo MR examination any time after filter implantation. In patients who have been treated with a weakly ferromagnetic IVC filter (Gianturco bird nest IVC filter [Cook], stainless steel Greenfield vena cava filter [Boston Scientific]), it is advised that the patient wait at least six weeks before undergoing an MR examination (because these older devices initially may not be anchored as firmly in place as other devices discussed in the present report), unless there is a strong clinical indication to perform the MR examination sooner after implantation, and as long as there is no reason to suspect that the device is not positioned properly or that it is not firmly in place. Most studies of IVC filters have generally been conducted at 1.5 Tesla or less, although many IVC filters have now been evaluated at 3 tesla and deemed acceptable for MR examination. The concept of a removable IVC filter was first thought up in 1967 However, it was not until 2003 and 2004 that the United States Food and Drug Administration drafted regulations and requirements on creating devices that were fit for retrieval from the vena cava And still, even while the FDA did approve of the models and designs, it wasn't until 2005 that the Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) convened a multidisciplinary conference to address the clinical application of nonpermanent vena cava filters. Retrievable filters are fitted with a device (varying from model to model) that allows them to be pulled back into a catheter (technically a "sheath") and removed from the body, often through the jugular vein. Prior to 2004, filters that had been in the IVC for less than three weeks were considered suitable to attempt retrieval, as filters that have been in place longer might have been overgrown by cells from the IVC wall and there was an increased risk of IVC injury if the filter is dislodged. Newer designs, and developments in techniques mean that some filters can now be left in for prolonged periods and retrievals after a year are now being reported. This would include the ALN, Bard G2 and G2x, Option, Tulip and Celect filters. It is important to note that the clinical exam prior to the removal of the filter is vital in understanding both the risk and pathophysiological effects removing the filter will have on the patient. Doctors and medical professionals must consider several key factors (see Indications for Removing IVC Filters). The IVC filter was developed by Lazar Greenfield. 
