 The International Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva Association (IFOPA) is a US-based 501(c)(3) non-profit organization supporting medical research, education and communication for those afflicted by the rare genetic condition Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP). IFOPA’s mission is to fund research to find a cure for FOP while supporting individuals and their families through education, public awareness and advocacy. IFOPA is governed by a volunteer board of directors which may range in number from 9 to 15, at least one of whom must have FOP. The association's office is located in Winter Springs, Florida, USA. Office staff consists of the Operations Manager, Communications and Membership Manager, and Accountant. IFOPA was founded in 1988 by Jeannie L. Peeper. Diagnosed with FOP in 1962 at age four, Peeper graduated from college in 1985 with a bachelor of arts degree in social work. Unaware of others with her condition, Peeper discovered that Dr. Michael Zasloff, then at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), was studying FOP. Zasloff put Peeper in contact with all FOP patients known to the NIH, eighteen in total, to whom Peeper mailed a questionnaire. Eleven responded. In early 1988, Peeper started a newsletter called FOP Connection in collaboration with Nancy Sando, one of the respondents. In June of that year, Peeper founded the IFOPA to facilitate fund raising for FOP research and generally create awareness of the disease. With an initial association membership of eleven, Peeper became the inaugural president and Sando was appointed vice president. In 1989, Peeper collaborated with the University of Pennsylvania to support establishment of the FOP Collaborative Research Project, and in 1992, the Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders, efforts spearheaded by Drs. Frederick S. Kaplan, Michael Zasloff, and Eileen M. Shore. Throughout the 1990s, IFOPA organized two international symposia on FOP and several FOP family meetings. During this period the association grew both in terms of fund raising and membership nationally and internationally. In the first decade of the 2000s, two more international symposia were hosted by IFOPA, and other FOP scientific and family meetings were held in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Sweden, and the UK. In April 2006, IFOPA celebrated the FOP Lab’s discovery of the FOP gene. By 2012, the organization had 590 members from 53 countries with 169 US-resident members with FOP and 279 international members with FOP. IFOPA has partnered with FOP organizations and communities in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, The Netherlands, People's Republic of China, Poland, Scandinavia, Serbia, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom. In 2010, IFOPA implemented the first annual Jeannie L Peeper Awards which recognize outstanding philanthropy, community involvement, international leadership and youth leadership in support of the FOP cause. In late 2010, the Central Florida Chapter of the Association of Fund Raising Professionals named Peeper as winner of the 2010 Lifetime Achievement Award for her work in founding and establishing the IFOPA. Historically, IFOPA has allocated over 80% of its annual budget to medical research and programs, donating in the range of $350,000 to $650,000 annually to the FOP Laboratory. IFOPA holds a 4-star rating from Charity Navigator, qualifying it as a "highly rated charity General overhead, defined as a combination of fund raising expenses and management expenses, averaged 15.6% for the years 2005 through 2009, well below the Ellison Research report that the average American believes 22.4 cents on the dollar being spent on overhead is a reasonable figure. The association's financial statements and 990s are posted on the IFOPA website. IFOPA fund raising results principally from family-organized activities rather than large nation-wide events. In addition to the association's own annual appeal, several grants, and traditional family/friends letter drives, the range of family fund raisers includes golf tournaments, barbecues, bingos, auctions, comedy shows, rock concerts, holiday card sales, raffles, suppers, athletic events, and a variety of other social events and receptions. Some of the more unusual fund raisers include an annual Burns Supper in Aberdeen Scotland, an ice fishing contest, and the auctioning of a quilt decorated with a double helical border symbolizing both the DNA double helix and the quest to find a cure. IFOPA staff provide support and advice for families and organizations that host such fund raising activities sometimes becoming directly involved but most events are organized locally. IFOPA generates modest revenue from the sale of branded merchandise such as T-shirts, books and bracelets through its website. In 2010, the association established the Jeannie Peeper Heritage Society, a fund raising program that targets major donors and estate giving. IFOPA's medical and scientific advisors are Frederick S. Kaplan, MD, Eileen M. Shore, PhD, Robert J. Pignolo, MD PhD, and Michael Zasloff, MD PhD. The foregoing advise the association on issues such as family support and counseling, dissemination of medical documents and treatment guidelines, medical document translation, physician awareness strategies, research funding requests and initiatives, and other matters for which their expertise is required. Dr. Kaplan is the Isaac and Rose Nassau Professor of Orthopaedic Molecular Medicine and Chief of the Division of Orthopaedic Molecular Medicine at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Kaplan co-directs the Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders and "is recognized as the world's leading expert on genetic disorders of heterotopic ossification and skeletal metamorphosis". In 1997, Kaplan was awarded the first endowed chair in the USA for orthopaedic molecular medicine. In 2006, Newsweek named Kaplan as one of "15 people who make America great". In 2009, Kaplan was elected to the Institute of Medicine, an organization established by the United States National Academy of Sciences to honor professional achievement in the health sciences. Dr. Eileen Shore is the Cali and Weldon Research Professor in FOP, and Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery and Genetics in the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Co-Director of the Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders, and director of the FOP Molecular Biology Laboratory. She is a past-president of the Advances in Mineral Metabolism (AIMM) Board of Directors and was recently elected to the American Society of Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) Council. Shore was awarded a PhD from the University of Pennsylvania (Cell and Molecular Biology) followed by post-doctoral training in cell biology at the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia. Shore’s collaboration with Kaplan led to the discovery of the mutated genes in both FOP and POH Progressive osseous heteroplasia. Dr. Robert J. Pignolo is the Ian Cali Clinical and Research Scholar in the Center for Research in FOP and Related Disorders and Assistant Professor in the Departments of Medicine and Orthopaedic Surgery in the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. He is the recipient of the Austrian Award for Outstanding Junior Faculty Bench Research, the Advances in Mineral Metabolism (AIMM) – American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) John Haddad Young Investigator Award, and the ASBMR Early Career Excellence in Teaching Award. He is director of Ralston-Penn Clinic for Osteoporosis & Related Bone Disorders since 2004, and has conducted basic and clinical research on FOP since 2003. Currently, he oversees the FOP Preclinical Drug Testing and Biomarker Development Program in the Center for FOP and Related Disorders. Dr. Michael Zasloff is Professor of Surgery and Pediatrics, and Director of Immunology at the Transplant Institute of the Georgetown University School of Medicine. In the early 1980s, during his tenure at the National Institutes of Health as Chief of the Human Genetics Branch, he began clinical and basic studies of FOP and helped found the IFOPA with Jeannie Peeper. In 1989, as the Upham Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics at the University of Pennsylvania and Chief of the Division of Human Genetics of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, he began his collaboration with Dr. Fred Kaplan to find both the cause and cure of FOP. As a result of the rareness of FOP, the condition is little known even among medical clinicians. Close to 90% of FOP patients worldwide are misdiagnosed. In such circumstances, the association directly supports research, makes information about FOP including symptoms and treatment guidelines available to both physicians and families, and supports afflicted families with mentoring, family meetings and an information network. Below are IFOPA's programs of research, education, family support, and advocacy. Additional information about these programs, including downloadable reports, articles and other materials, may be obtained from the IFOPA website. Scientific in content; suitable for physicians and scientists. Articles are downloadable from the IFOPA website. 
