 IACAPAP is a non-governmental international association, the professional organization that serves as an umbrella for child and adolescent mental health associations and societies throughout the world and their individual members. IACAPAP advocates for the needs of troubled children and their families at the national and international level through its member associations and via links with the World Health Organisation and World Psychiatric Association, among others, and is committed to mitigate disparities of all kinds affecting children's health and development. In 1935 a group of child psychiatrists started work to establish and expand contacts between psychiatrists working in the new medical field of child psychiatry in spite of the social and political turmoil surrounding the 2nd World War. These pioneers were Georges Heuyer (France), Moritz Tramer (Switzerland), Paul Schröder (Germany), Carlos de Sanctis (Italy), Nic Waal (Norway) and Emanuel Miller (UK). What is called IACAPAP today started in 1937 as The International Committee for Child Psychiatry. Georges Heuyer, the then head of the Clinique Annexe de Neuropsychiatrie Infantile in Paris, organized and chaired the first congress in Paris in 1937—officially called the First International Conference on Child Psychiatry. Together with Heuyer, Moritz Tramer (Switzerland) was involved in the organization of this congress where delegates from 26 countries—mostly European—participated. Ten years and a world war later, the second international congress took place in London in 1948. During this meeting The International Committee was renamed The International Association for Child Psychiatry (IACP) with about 30 national societies as members. All countries were to have access to IACP, however a credentials committee was set up to verify the qualifications of each applicant.The name of the Association was changed again during the Lisbon congress of 1958, this time into The International Association for Child Psychiatry and Allied Professions (IACP&AP;). It was not until the 9th Congress (Melbourne, Australia, 1978) that adolescents were incorporated in the official name: The International Association for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Allied Professions (IACAPAP). In 1954 the Association was officially incorporated in Massachusetts as a tax-exempt organization. Currently IACAPAP is registered in Geneva, Switzerland, as a non-government organization (NGO) structured as a corporation and empowered as a juridical entity according to articles 60 ss of the Swiss Civil Code and the Constitution. Membership comprises three categories: full members (currently about 60 national organizations of child and adolescent psychiatrists and allied mental health professionals from all continents), affiliate (other organizations), and individual. The Executive Committee (board), elected for a four-year term, consists of: president, secretary-general and treasurer (together with the immediate past-president they form the Bureau) and nine vice-presidents, elected taking into consideration gender, geographical, cultural and professional backgrounds, to maximize representation. The Association organizes world congresses every two to four years, circumstances permitting. The General Assembly occurs every four years in connection with a congress. The 21st congress is to be held in Durban, South Africa, in 2014. A list of the international congress can be found at www.iacapap.org/world-congresses/past-congresses In the last decade IACAPAP has increasingly emphasized its involvement with low-resource countries with regard to membership, ambitions and educational activities. Study groupsThe Association arranges study groups with the cooperation of members from the Executive Committee and international and regional faculty to stimulate the development of child mental health in countries with less developed child mental health services—for example, in the former soviet states, Kenya and Nigeria. The Donald J Cohen Fellowship ProgrammeThis program began in 2004. It supports the attendance of highly promising young mental health professionals from around the world, particularly from low income countries, to IACAPAP congresses and provides them with a mentoring program to encourage education, support and networking. The Helmut Remschmidt Research SeminarThe Helmut Remschmidt Research Seminar, which began in 1998, supports young child and adolescent mental health professionals who intend to pursue a scientific career. The structure is always the same. Participants are proposed by the presidents of their national organizations. IACAPAP has a long history of educational activities in the form of publications and maintains a website www.iacapap.org During the 1960s the scientific journal Acta Paedopsychiatrica served as the official IACAPAP organ. Now the on-line-journal Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health (www.capmh.com) has become the official scientific journal of IACAPAP.If networking with like-minded professionals was the initial driving force for the association, the emphasis soon evolved into what it is today: “To advocate for the promotion of mental health and development of children and adolescents through policy, practice and research. To promote the study, treatment, care and prevention of mental and emotional disorders and disabilities involving children, adolescents and their families through collaboration among the professions of child and adolescent psychiatry, psychology, social work, paediatrics, public health, nursing, education, social sciences and other relevant disciplines”. BulletinIACAPAP publishes a quarterly Bulletin that seeks to inform its members and the community at large about recent, current and future IACAPAP activities and other news relevant to child and adolescent mental health professionals all over the world. Bulletins can be found at www.iacapap.org/bulletins Monographs on child and adolescent mental healthSince 1970 the Association has published 18 multi-author monographs, usually dealing with topics related to the theme of the respective international congress. e-textbookAn electronic textbook –IACAPAP Textbook of Child and Adolescent Mental Health, has been published since 2012. It is available freely on the web, particularly for the benefit of professionals who would otherwise not be able to purchase a printed textbook. Declarations and statementsSince 1992, declarations and statements have addressed areas of concern related to the development and mental health of children and they have outlined optimal management approaches. The declarations are meant to be widely circulated as advocacy documents. Special attention has been given to the promotion of the rights of children and ethical issues. 1. www.iacapap.org.2. Schleimer, K. 75 Years with IACAPAP – The History of IACAPAP. IACAPAP, 2012. www.iacapap.orgInternational Association for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Allied ProfessionsAbbreviation: IACAPAPFormation: 1937Type: NGORegion served: all continents 
