 The International Society for Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) is a medical association for pediatric oncologists. Founded in Zurich in the late 1960s, the organization now has an international membership of 1,450 medical professionals and Continental Branches in Europe, North America, Asia, Oceania, and South America Although English is now the more popular language among its members, the acronym SIOP comes from the society’s original French name, Société Internationale d’Oncologie Pédiatrique. The association is known by both its English and French titles. SIOP's official language is English. SIOP’s vision is that “No child should die of cancer.” To that end, the association has a four-part mission: SIOP members meet at least once per year at the SIOP Annual Congress. The congress is focused on scientific and administrative issues. Speakers are taken largely from the society’s member base and present lectures on relevant medical treatments and scientific advances. Scholarships are available to help members travel to congresses. SIOP also produces education books and training guidelines based on the material shared at its congresses. The 2011 Annual Congress will take place in Auckland, New Zealand. The SIOP Pediatric Oncology in Developing Countries (PODC) Committee focuses on improving care for and lower abandonment rates of children with cancer in developing countries. The PODC is composed of twelve working groups, the most prominent of which are the ICCCPO Parent Support Groups, the PODC Nurses Group, and the Supportive Care and Nutrition Working Group. The most former of these groups creates support networks for parents in developing countries as a means to raise awareness of cancer treatment and provide the necessary supplies. The PODC Nurses Group focuses on finding ways to help nurses in developing countries. Its work is loosely affiliated with that of the SIOP Nurses Committee, which focuses on the role of nurses in helping child cancer patients in general. The Supportive Care Group is concerned with pain management in developing countries SIOP hosts a Pediatric Psycho-Oncology Subcommittee (PPO). The subcommittee works to develop the association's relationship with professionals in the field of psycho-oncology and thus improve SIOP's practices. The association also provides two International Pediatric Oncology Fellowships to medical professionals under 40 years of age. One of these awards, the Outreach Fellowship, is only available to a professional from a developing country SIOP’s official scientific publication is the Pediatric Blood & Cancer journal, published by Wiley-Blackwell The current officers of the Board of Directors are as follows: 
