 The Irish Blood Transfusion Service (IBTS), or Seirbhís Fuilaistriúcháin na hÉireann in Irish, was established in the Republic of Ireland as the Blood Transfusion Service Board (BTSB) by the Blood Transfusion Service Board (Establishment) Order, 1965, it took its current name in April 2000 by Statutory Instrument issued by the Minister for Heath and Children to whom it is responsible. The primary responsibly of the service is the provision of blood and blood products for humans. The service is the successor to the National Blood Transfusion Association which was established in 1948 and was, itself, born from the work carried out by the St. John Ambulance Brigade of Ireland in setting up an 'on call' blood donor panel to serve hospitals in the Dublin area. In 1975 the Cork Blood Transfusion Service was amalgamated with the board, and in 1991 the Limerick Blood Transfusion Service was amalgamated with the board. The symbol of the service is a stylised pelican, and for most of its existence the headquarters of the service was located at Pelican House (first in Lower Leeson Street and then Mespil Road), Dublin. In 2000 the service relocated to the state-of-the-art National Blood Centre on the grounds of St. James's Hospital near Dublin Heuston railway station, on which it remains. The service maintains regional facilities at Ardee, Carlow, Cork, Limerick and Tuam. Between 1977 and 1994 a number of people were infected with Hepatitis C unknowingly, and clear evidence on this did not become available until the mid-1990s. Most of the people who received this blood were women. The Hepatitis C and HIV Compensation Tribunal was established by the Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal Act, 1997, and amended by the Hepatitis C Compensation Tribunal (Amendment) Act, 2002, to compensate people who contracted Hepatitis C or HIV as a result of receiving blood or blood products from the service. The frequency of blood groups in Ireland is as follows: O Positive 47% O Negative 8% A Positive 28% A Negative 5% B Positive 9% B Negative 2% AB Positive 2% AB Negative 1% It is important that the IBTS collects enough O Rh D positive blood as almost half the population are that blood type. Donors with O Rh D negative are known as universal donors. Their blood can be transfused to patients of any other blood group in an emergency or if the patient's own blood group is unavailable. Because any patient can receive O Rh D negative blood, the IBTS need to have extra O Rh D negative blood available at all times. The service depends entirely on voluntary donations from the public. New donors must be aged between 18 and 60, over 50 kilograms (7 stone 12 lbs) and in good health.At every donation haemoglobin levels are checked and donors complete an in depth health and lifestyle questionnaire.Donors can give blood every 90 days. The IBTS imposes a number of restrictions on those who can give blood. These are in line with those of the European Union, World Health Organisation and the Irish Medicines Board and are similar to other countries. These restrictions are in place to ensure that all blood products are safe for recipients. A 6 month restriction is placed on donors who have had piercings or tattoos, had acupuncture and a 6 month restriction if you have visited a tropical area. There is a year long deferral for those who have visited a malarial area. Donors who have travelled to the USA or Canada have to wait for 4 weeks before donating due to the West Nile Virus. Certain medications or conditions can also exclude people from donation. Additionally, there are groups of people who are permanently barred from donating blood based on their membership in high-risk groups. This list includes all people who have lived for a year or more in the United Kingdom between the years 1980–1996 are excluded from donating, along with any medical procedures received in the UK since 01/01/1980 due to the risk of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD). vCJD has a long incubation period and there is no laboratory test which can detect the disease. Also permanently barred are all people who have ever been injected with any kind of non-prescription drug, and all people who have ever been paid for sex with money or drugs. Any man who has ever had sexual contact with another man is prohibited from donating blood. This is in line with a number of other national blood transfusion services, due to the statistically high prevalence of HIV and hepatitis of MSM in population studies. A 2011 statistical and epidemiological review into blood service policy in the UK found that if the ban on MSM donating blood were to be lifted, the risk of HIV entering blood stocks could increase by 500%. The IBTS "accepts that they are being discriminatory; we discriminate against several groups in the community insofar as we refuse to allow them to donate blood on the basis of perceived increased risk of spreading infections through blood transfusion". Several campaigns have been launched in an effort to reverse the ban. Gay Doctors Ireland denounced the ban as "unscientific" and outdated. Donors are recognised for their commitment by being awarded as follows:A silver award for 10 donations.A gold award for 20 donations.A gold drop for 50 donations and presentation at an awards dinner ceremony.A porcelain pelican for 100 donations and presentation at an awards dinner ceremony. The Irish Blood Transfusion Service is also responsible for the collection of platelets and for managingthe Unrelated Bone Marrow registry in Ireland.Donors can give platelets in the National Blood Centre, James Street, Dublin 8 or in St. Finbarrs Hospital, Cork.Donors can join the unrelated bone marrow registry through their local blood clinic by offering an extra blood sample andsatisfying suitability criteria. 
