 Isaac "Ike" Starr (March 6, 1895 – June 22, 1989) was an American physician and heart disease specialist notable for developing the first practical ballistocardiograph. His early academic positions included being an assistant professor in pharmacology and later the first Hartzell Professor of Research Therapeutics at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine as well as dean of the medical school from 1945 to 1948. Starr attended primary and secondary school in Philadelphia, graduating from the Chestnut Hill Academy in 1912. From there he went to Princeton University where he received his Bachelor of Science (Sc.B.) degree, graduating in 1916. He received his Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) degree from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in 1920. After receiving his M.D., Starr went to Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston where he completed his internship before returning to Penn, where he later became a heart disease specialist, motivated by the heart disease-related death of his mother. After returning to Penn, Starr joined Alfred Newton Richards’ group investigating mechanisms by which the kidney created urine. At the request of Richards, Starr became one of the first assistant professors at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in 1928, doing research which used physics and mathematics in the study of the heart, and leading a course in clinical pharmacology for the medical students. Only a few years later, he participated in a cardiac output methods program by the American Physiological Society at which his colleague, Yandell Henderson, demonstrated an apparatus for measuring cardiac output, a ballistocardiograph. This project, a suspended bed rigged with springs to pick up resonance frequencies and amplify them, inspired Starr to develop a practical version for use in his own research, with the help of the Eldridge Reeves Johnson Foundation for Medical Physics. This new device used an optical recording system for more accurate readings, however, due to the low natural frequency of heartbeats, patients had to hold their breath while using it. The issue led him to modify the design of the bed to counteract the minute movements using springs, thereby fixing this flaw and allowing the patients to breathe. The final device was used to measure cardiac output and led to the first accurate physical measurements and also detection for when the heart chambers do not contract simultaneously. The most notable use, however, was that of detecting heart abnormalities much earlier and more accurately in patients, leading to further development and extensive contributions to the field from 1930 to 1960. In 1933, he became the first Hartzell Professor of Research Therapeutics at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and held the position until 1961. The endowed chair funded everything except for salaries for his research assistants. The University of Pennsylvania awarded Starr with an honorary Doctor of Science (Sc.D.) degree in 1983 for his contributions to medicine. {{Persondata | NAME = Starr, Isaac | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| NICKNAME = Ike Starr| SHORT DESCRIPTION = Physician| DATE OF BIRTH = 6 March 1895| PLACE OF BIRTH = Philadelphia, Pennsylvania| DATE OF DEATH = 22 June 1989| PLACE OF DEATH = Roxborough, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania}} 
