 Jean Griswold founded Griswold Special Care (GSC) in 1982, a home care company specializing in referring non-medical caregivers to individuals who need personal care providers, homemakers, or companions or an in-home caregiver. In 1982, Jean, the wife of a minister, Dr. Lincoln Griswold, learned that a woman in her husband’s church had died because the woman was unable to find anyone to care for her. She stopped eating and drinking and died of kidney failure. The Griswolds realized this death could have been prevented if help had been available. Jean, a former geriatric counselor, with a master's degree in education, had a deep compassion for people with physical difficulties since she had been living with Multiple Sclerosis since 1969. GRISWOLD SPECIAL CARE (see also home care)was Jean’s calling in life. On September 27th 1997,First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton wrote to Dr. Griswold from the White House: I commend you for your efforts to alleviate the suffering of others and to improve the quality of life for the people in communities throughout the Northeast. The company was the first to offer 24 hour service at affordable prices. In 1985 Jean’s husband joined his wife at GSC. On August 20th 1997 Tipper Gore wrote to Dr. Griswold from the Office Of The Vice President of the United States: Your entrepreneurship and ingenuity have enabled individuals with illnesses to have the opportunity to receive the care they deserve. Jean and Lincoln's founding vision are still actively engaged throughout the company. In 2007, when GSC celebrated its 25th anniversary, the company had 90 offices nationally and two international offices in South Korea and Mexico. Over 9500 caregivers help thousands of clients 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. In 2008 the company has almost 100 offices in 17 states. Jean is a strong supporter of Sandwich Generation which helps people who have to care for their parents along with their children. GSC has been profiled in Forbes, Entrepreneur, Success, and has been featured on NBC’s Today show. GSC has won the National Caregivers Friendly Award for service to individuals and families, and the Mature Media Award for print articles and videos. Jean Griswold has received numerous awards over the years, and these include: Jean Griswold received a doctorate from Holy Family University: Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters 2006, and is the founder of Nursing Options, Pop-Ins and House Calls Unlimited. {{Persondata | NAME =Griswold, Jean | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
