 John Frederick Stein PhD CBiol FIBiol FRCPath is a Professor and Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, a constituent college of Oxford University. He holds a Professorship of Physiology, and has research interests in the neurological basis of dyslexia. He is the brother of Rick Stein, the well-known British chef and the uncle of Judge Jules the international super-star DJ. He is the chair of the Dyslexia Research Trust and is a proponent of the magnocellular theory of dyslexia. He has supervised many medical and physiology students at the University to conduct laboratory work in support of the theory. He is a trustee of the Institute for Food, Brain and Behaviour and Chair of the Institute's Science Advisory Council. John Stein is very active in furthering the medical benefits of animal testing. He speaks at pro-testing rallies and demonstrations, and has defended animal testing in high-profile television interviews. He also came into the public eye when Gordon Brown suggested a student had been discriminated against because of her state school education. This was despite the fact that she had comparable qualifications to the accepted applicants, and that the accepted applicants came from a broad range of backgrounds. Government ministers were quick to comment that Oxford remained biased in favour of public schools, but did so before they knew that no discrimination on that basis had occurred. Indeed, on the contrary, Professor Stein has worked hard to break down barriers and encourage access to those from a state school background. He is held in high esteem by the many students, present and past, whose lives and careers he has helped shape. Along with Tipu Aziz and Kevin Warwick, Stein is presently working on an intelligent Deep brain stimulation system for Parkinson's disease. Alongside his former D.Phil student, Joe Taylor, Stein has advocated a new theory of central noradrenergic deficiency in Dyslexia. Taylor and Stein have proposed that increasing noradrenergic output from the locus coeruleus via a subcortical irradiance detection pathway may prove effective in the treatment of the condition. {{Persondata | NAME = Stein, John | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = British physiologist | DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
