 Joshua B. Bederson, M.D., is a neurosurgeon and Professor and Chief of Neurosurgery at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City. He is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons and an attending neurosurgeon at both Mount Sinai and Elmhurst Hospital in Elmhurst, Queens. Bederson is co-author of Treatment of Carotid Disease: A Practitioner's Manual (ISBN 1-879284-55-3), 12 chapters and 53 peer-reviewed articles. In 1979, Bederson graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Cornell University, where he was the Ivy League Gymnastics All-Around Champion for three years. He earned his M.D. at the University of California, San Francisco in 1984, taking a year off to study sculpture in the master's degree program at New York University and holding a solo art show in New York City. Bederson completed both his internship and residency at the University of California, San Francisco. During his residency, he also studied neuropathology at the University of Torino in Italy and microvascular and skull-base neurosurgery under Dr. M. Gazi Yasargil at the University Hospitals of Zurich, Switzerland and the University Medical Center in Ljubljana, Slovenia. He completed a fellowship in cerebrovascular surgery at the Barrow Neurological Institute in Arizona under Dr. Robert F. Spetzler. Bederson joined Mount Sinai in 1992 as the Director of the Clinical Program for Cerebrovascular Disorders and served as Vice-Chairman after 2001. From 2002 until 2008 he directed the Neurosurgery Residency Program. He is currently the Chairman of the Department of Neurosurgery. Bederson established the first basic science laboratory in the Department of Neurosurgery at Mount Sinai, developing models of stroke and subarachnoid hemorrhage. In 2002 he was the first neurosurgeon at Mount Sinai to receive an NIH R01 grant as principal investigator. A high-ranking member of many cerebrovascular societies, Bederson is chair of the AANS/CNS Cerebrovascular section. With Bederson serving as its Chairman, the American Heart Association Guidelines Writing Group on Subarachnoid Hemorrhage published updated guidelines on stroke treatment. He is also a member of the Society of Neurological Surgery. Bederson's clinical interests include treatment of intracranial and spinal vascular and tumor pathology, including cerebral aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, trigeminal neuralgia, tumors of the skull base, carotid artery disease and problems of the cervical and lumbar spine. During his surgical internship, he met and married Isabelle Germano, M.D. who is also Professor of Neurosurgery at Mount Sinai. They have 2 daughters, Lucia and Maria. Partial list: Partial list: {{Persondata | NAME =Bederson, Joshua B. | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 1957 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
