 Joslin Diabetes Center is the world’s largest diabetes research center, diabetes clinic, and provider of diabetes education. It is located in the Longwood Medical and Academic Area in Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Among the Harvard Medical School Affiliated institutions, Joslin is unique in its sole focus on diabetes. Joslin has the world’s largest team of board-certified physicians treating diabetes and its complications, as well as the largest staff of Certified Diabetes Educators anywhere in the world. Since its inception, Joslin has focused on aggressive, comprehensive care of the patient.Over 23,000 active patients receive specialty care for their eyes, hearts, kidneys, pregnancies and feet. Joslin supports the world’s largest diabetes research team with more than 40 faculty level investigators for a total of more than 300 researchers. Joslin has 46 clinical care affiliates in the US and two in other countries. Joslin Diabetes was founded in 1898 in Boston by famed diabetes specialist Elliott P. Joslin on the belief that the key to managing diabetes is with patient involvement, education and empowerment. Joslin Clinic has helped revolutionize the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of diabetes, most notably Some notable historic milestones include: JoslinCare is a multi-disciplinary program that includes: Some of the clinical programs at Joslin include: Beetham Eye Institute: The Beetham uses advanced diagnostics, laser treatment, cataract and retinal surgery, vision rehabilitation and novel therapies to help preserve the eyesight of diabetic patients. Over the last 30 years, techniques pioneered at the Beetham have preserved the vision of millions of people. Pediatric Diabetes Section: Joslin Clinic has a reputation for pioneering care and support of pediatric patients with diabetes and their families. The pediatric staff includes board-certified endocrinologists, pediatric diabetes nurse educators, pediatric nutritionists child psychologists, a social worker, and a child life specialist. Nephrology Section: Joslin provides the educational, medical, and emotional support needed to manage all forms of kidney disease, which impacts a significant number of people with diabetes. The goal is to detect, delay, and potentially reverse the effects of diabetes on the kidneys as early as possible. Multicultural Health Clinics: In response to the fact that Latinos and Asian Americans develop diabetes at a much higher rate than the general population, Joslin established clinics for both of these patient populations. They offer culturally appropriate care and bilingual staff. Patient EducationPatient education is an integral part of JoslinCareTM — the model of diabetes care at the Joslin Clinic. Joslin has the largest staff of Certified Diabetes Educators anywhere in the world. Expertly trained, nationally certified diabetes educators include diabetes nurse educators, registered dietitians and exercise physiologists. Specialists work with patients one-on-one, or through a variety of programs and classes. Educators work as part of the diabetes care team to provide coordinated, sequenced learning activities. Joslin also offers specialty programs in cardiovascular disease, mental health and counseling services, peripheral neuropathy, obesity, insulin pump therapy, diabetes and pregnancy, diabetes and aging, hypoglycemia, sexual function and disorders of the feet. In addition, Joslin has a number of initiatives aimed at developing and providing culturally-competent diabetes education, such as the Latino Diabetes Initiative and the Asian American Diabetes Initiative. Joslin Research conducts the most comprehensive diabetes research effort in the world and is at the forefront of discovery aimed at preventing and curing diabetes. Many important historical discoveries and improvements in diabetes care worldwide were developed at Joslin. These include recognition that tight blood glucose control can slow or prevent diabetes complications, creation of treatment protocols to enable women with diabetes to have healthy babies, the identification of markers for pre-diabetes, and pioneering laser surgery for diabetic eye disease. Joslin researchers have won top awards and recognition from the National Academy of Sciences, the Institute of Medicine, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF), among many others. The number of papers Joslin researchers present each year at the annual ADA Scientific Sessions surpasses any other organization. Joslin also offers one of the largest diabetes research training programs in the world, with more than 120 M.D. and Ph.D. fellows training at the center annually. Joslin has 46 clinical care Affiliates in the United States and two internationally. 
