 Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences (KCUMB) is a health sciences university located in Kansas City, in the U.S. state of Missouri. The university was founded in 1916, and currently consists of both a College of Osteopathic Medicine and a College of Biosciences. The school occupies the original site of Children’s Mercy Hospital. KCUMB is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools and recognized by the Coordinating Board of Higher Education for the Missouri Department of Higher Education. The College of Osteopathic Medicine is accredited by the American Osteopathic Association's Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation. KCUMB's College of Osteopathic Medicine was founded on May 19, 1916, as the Kansas City College of Osteopathy and Surgery. In January 1921, the college moved to the Northwest neighborhood, just east of downtown. In November 1970, the name of the college was changed to The Kansas City College of Osteopathic Medicine (KCCOM), and again in July 1980 to The University of Health Sciences (UHS). In 2004, the name was changed to the current Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences. Since 1916, the University has awarded the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree to more than 7,000 graduates. Current enrollment includes approximately 1,000 students from nearly every state in the U.S. and several foreign countries. About 49 percent of the student body is female. In 1940, Kansas City College of Osteopathy and Surgery took over the assets of the Central College of Osteopathy, Kansas City, MO. In 1999, KCUMB joined with seven other research institutions to form the Kansas City Area Life Sciences Institute (KCALSI). As a founding KCALSI partner, KCUMB is working to transform Kansas City into a national center for biomedical research. In May 2004, the UHS name gave way to Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences. The name reflected a change in mission as the University added a second college, the College of Biosciences. The College of Biosciences accepted its first students in the fall of 2005, offering a one-year master of science in biomedical sciences degree. The College of Biosciences has since added a two-year master of science in biomedical sciences and a master of arts in bioethics, which will enroll its first students in Fall 2008. For a period in 2009, Karen Pletz, the president of the university, was pursuing the possibility of offering a dual DO/MD degree. The idea was very controversial and raised concerns within the osteopathic medical community. Several leaders of the profession formally requested the option be abandoned. Pletz was subsequently fired, but refrained from discussing the details of her dismissal as a lawsuit was underway. The lawsuit and firing related to financial disagreements between Pletz and the university. Later that day, Pletz filed a countersuit against the school for alleged wrongful termination. KCUMB offers graduate degrees in medicine, biomedical sciences, and bioethics. The College of Osteopathic Medicine is one of three medical schools in the United States to be recognized twice with the John Templeton Foundation’s Spirituality in Medicine Curricular Award, which recognizes outstanding medical education curricula incorporating spirituality in medicine. KCUMB is also one of three osteopathic medical schools nationwide working to enhance future physicians’ cultural competency and eliminate disparities in health care through a grant from the American Medical Student Association. Through the Genesis curriculum, students in KCUMB’s College of Osteopathic Medicine develop clinical decision-making skills using an integrated, patient-centered approach to medicine that combines basic and clinical sciences. This "Body Systems" based approach means that students learn both basic and clinical sciences in sections that include Musculoskeletal, Cardiopulmonary, Gastrointestinal, Renal, Neuro, Reproduction, Skin/Blood/Lymph, and more. In addition students also take Osteopathic Clinical Skills, Osteopathic Communication Skills, and additional elective courses throughout their first and second year. The College of Osteopathic Medicine was established in 1916 and has graduated more than 7,000 osteopathic physicians since. Through this college, KCUMB confers the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) degree. The college of osteopathic medicine is fully accredited by the American Osteopathic Association's Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation (COCA). The school also has an early matriculation program, called the Partnership Plan, with several undergraduate institutions. In this program students can apply to in their sophomore year of college and be accepted by their junior year. The College of Osteopathic Medicine offers two dual-degree programs: a D.O./M.B.A. in Healthcare Leadership, and a D.O./M.A. in Bioethics. The M.B.A. in leadership and management is offered through a partnership with Rockhurst University’s Helzberg School of Management. The degree complements students' medical education by developing physician-managers of competence and conscience with the business and leadership skills necessary to provide quality, holistic healthcare. M.B.A. coursework is integrated into the existing KCUMB curriculum. Dual-degree students complete both programs in 4 years and graduate with other members of their KCUMB class. The College of Biosciences was established in 2005 and currently offers two degrees: a Master of Science in Biomedical Sciences and a Masters in Bioethics. Students interested in pursuing the accredited master of science in biomedical sciences can enroll in either a 12-month or 24-month track. The 12-month track places emphasis on the acquisition of knowledge regarding state-of-the-art research methodologies and protocols. The 24-month track targets individuals interested in pursuing careers as research scientists, and includes coursework in biochemistry, cell biology, genetics, research design and ethics, research instrumentation and methodology, biostatistics and epidemiology. The Masters in Bioethics is Kansas City's only graduate-level degree in bioethics. It is designed to explore the moral values as they relate to research and the practice of medicine. Score 1 for Health is a non-profit organization that administers free, comprehensive health screenings to elementary-aged children living in Kansas City's urban core. The program gives students hands-on clinical training while still in their first and second year of medical school. The programs screens up to 13,000 kids for vision, dental, hearing, blood pressure, height/weight and more every year. On campus, there is the Administrative Building, located where Children's Mercy Hospital once existed, which houses the administrative offices and support facilities, the Annex Building, which houses 2,200+ seat lecture halls, and the D'Angelo Library. The D'Angelo Library opened in the spring of 2011 and includes a learning resources center, collection and reference rooms, several training and conference rooms, an audio-visual/multimedia room, a special collections room, and group study rooms and numerous offices for library support personnel. The library is named for Vincent F. D'Angelo, D.O. (COM '57), and his wife, Cleo V. D'Angelo. The Leonard Smith Hall houses more than 50 individual and small-group study rooms, a computer lab, student lounge, and a state-of-the-art Bioethics classroom. The Mary Lou Butterworth, D.O., Alumni Center is a meeting center for students, faculty, and alumni. The Dybedal Center for Research is the focus of research activities at KCUMB. The center is equipped for Biosafety Levels I and II research and includes more than of basic science laboratories. Opened in 2004, the Dybedal Center also includes an clinical research center, the only adult academic clinical research center in Kansas City, Mo., which conducts Phase I-IV studies. The Kesselheim Center for Clinical Competence, completed in 2006, significantly enhances the early clinical education of first- and second-year KCUMB medical students. By linking eight high-tech human patient simulators with the College of Osteopathic Medicine’s well-established Standardized Patient Program, medical students are provided invaluable opportunities to evaluate, diagnose and treat hundreds of “patients” in a realistic, yet risk-free environment. The Strickland Education Pavilion, opened in 1996, houses a state-of-the-art anatomy and OMT laboratories with fully integrated camera equipment, a high-tech classroom for biomedical sciences students, a 250-seat auditorium, a cafeteria, teaching labs, and meeting rooms. The Student Activities Center opened in early 2011. The building includes a student lounge, Common Grounds Cafe, meetings and conference rooms, Matthews Bookstore, a multi-dimensional fitness center with cardiovascular and weight training equipment, an aerobics facility, and game room. The building is connected to Weaver Auditorium. In 2007, the University officially opened the Weaver Auditorium, a 1,500-seat auditorium named in honor of Jack T. Weaver, D.O., Mary Weaver, Howard D. Weaver, D.O., and Debra S. Albers, D.O. 
