 Kris Carr (born August 31, 1971) is the New York Times Best-Selling author of Crazy Sexy Diet and Crazy Sexy Kitchen, a wellness activist and cancer thriver. She documented her battle against epithelioid hemangioendothelioma in her documentary film Crazy Sexy Cancer. Carr grew up in Pawling, New York and attended the Wooster School in Danbury, Connecticut. She attended the School of Performing Arts in New Milford, Connecticut, where she studied dance and Italian. After high school, Carr attended Sarah Lawrence College and later Marymount Manhattan College where she majored in English Literature and Art History. Carr began her career as a dancer, American actress and photographer living in New York City. As an actress, she worked both on and off Broadway, as well as in film and television. She appeared in television shows including Law & Order, as well as dozens of commercials, most notably as a Bud girl for two Budweiser beer Super Bowl commercials. Carr also originated a role in Arthur Miller's, "Mr. Peter's Connections," in which she played the ghost of Marilyn Monroe alongside actor Peter Falk. Carr directed and choreographed stage productions regionally and abroad and served as a faculty member at Stone Street Studios and Playwrights Horizons Theater School, both at NYU. From 1999 - 2006, Carr had a photography business in New York City where she shot portraits and head-shots for actors. Carr closed the studio a few years after she was diagnosed to pursue film-making and writing. In 2002, Carr directed her first short film entitled "Redemption" about the 20th anniversary of the Bottle Bill and the homeless men and women who rely on the nickel deposits for their livelihood. On February 14, 2003 - Valentine's Day - Carr was diagnosed with an extremely rare and incurable Stage IV cancer called epithelioid hemangioendothelioma affecting her liver and her lungs. With the slow-moving nature of her tumors, Carr decided to take what she calls a "watch and live" approach. After her diagnosis, she turned to nutrition to boost her immune system and increase her longevity. She also decided to make a documentary film about her journey with cancer. In March 2007 the documentary Crazy Sexy Cancer was released, along with a companion book: Crazy Sexy Cancer Tips. In the book, Carr points out that when she first became diagnosed there weren't any books or movies that dealt with the situations and problems facing young women with cancer. The documentary was a hit at the South by Southwest Film Festival in Austin, Texas and went on to air on TLC (The Learning Channel). In August of the same year, Carr founded her blog website Crazysexylife.com. VegNews awarded a 2009 Veggie Award to Carr's blog for its Website Launch of the Year. In October 2007, Carr appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show along with professor and inspirational speaker Randy Pausch for a show on confronting death. In 2008, Crazy Sexy Cancer Survivor was published and included a foreword by Marianne Williamson. Early in 2008, Carr also launched her online community, My Crazy Sexy Life (my.crazysexylife.com), which now has over 28,000 members. Early in 2011, Carr published her third book, Crazy Sexy Diet, which spent four weeks on the New York Times best seller list and reached #1 on Amazon.com. With this book, Carr expanded her reach by speaking to anyone who is looking for a healthier life, regardless of whether they have cancer or not. The book also includes a 21-day cleanse. Four years after its release, in October 2011, Crazy Sexy Cancer was featured as part of the Super Soul Sunday series on OWN: The Oprah Winfrey Network. In 2012, Carr published her fourth book, Crazy Sexy Kitchen, a New York Times best-selling plant-based cookbook with Chef Chad Sarno. Crazy Sexy Kitchen is a veggie manifesto for plant-empowered gourmands and novices alike, and it’s filled with inspiration, education, cooking tips, and over 150 nourishing, nosh-worthy recipes. Also in 2012, Carr founded her website KrisCarr.com and started creating weekly blogs and videos for her readers. Carr regularly lectures at medical schools, hospitals, wellness centers, corporations such as Whole Foods, and Harvard University. She is a Contributing Editor for Natural Health Magazine and writes for many online publications. Television appearances include: CBS Evening News with Katie Couric, The Early Show, Today Show, Good Morning America, The Gayle King Show, Super Soul Sunday series on OWN: The Oprah Winfrey Network and The Oprah Winfrey Show. Carr currently resides in Woodstock, New York with her husband, Brian Fassett, and their rescue dog, Lola. The couple began their relationship while making Crazy Sexy Cancer, which Fassett filmed, edited and helped produce. The two wed in 2006. Carr is recognizable by a signature hot pink streak in her hair. She is a vegan and drinks green juice daily. She also practices yoga and meditation and is an avid animal-lover. {{Persondata | NAME = Carr, Kris | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = August 31, 1971 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
