 The Kyrgyz State Medical Institute (KSMA) was opened on the 1st September 1939 in city of Bishkek (formerly Frunze) with the recruitment of 200 students. The establishment of the Institute was invaluably contributed to by the First Moscow Medical Institute, high medical schools of Saint-Petersburg, Almaty, Tashkent and other medical institutions as well. They provided expertise and organizational assistance, medical guidelines and training books as well as faculty staff to do a full-time job for the Institute. During the years of its existence, the Medical Academy has trained foreign students from more than thirty countries. At present more than 12,000 students are studying at the Medical Institute, including 1,735 students from other countries such as: Instruction is in both English and Russian. The Medical Institute awards the degree of M.D. It is accredited, recognised and listed with the World Health Organization (WHO), Medical Council of Nepal,Medical Council of India (MCI) Education Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates (ECFMG) in the USA, IIME and the International Medical Education Directory (IMED), so its degree is recognized all over the world. This gives Medical Institute graduates the ability to continue postgraduate education in other countries in America and Europe. All clinical hospitals at the Medical Institute are equipped to train students. In particular, all types of diagnostics, thermovision, angiography, endoscopic technique, highly effective means of treatment by hyperbaric oxygenation, laser therapy, modern efferent methods of de-toxication and many others are widely. Basic goals of the partnership Under this partnership cooperation was launched between the КSМА and University of South Florida, which successfully develops in the field of Public Health. Between the КSМА and Clinic of Manual, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery of the Zurich University the agreement was concluded on cooperation, which envisages joint scientific and clinical researches, an exchange of experts, organization of joint discussions, international conferences and trainings. During several years there's been a Plastination Centre in Medical Academy, which was established under cooperation of the KSMA with Institute of Plastination of the Heidelberg University (Germany). On the basis of the Institute of Plastination, КSМА opened its museum of plastination, analogues of which can be found only in Germany and China. Pursuing the goal of the subsequent intensification and expansion of cooperation in the field of higher education the Medical Academy has signed agreements on cooperation with Mudonzjan Medical Institute (the People's Republic of China), with Novosibirsk State Medical Academy (Russia), with Turkmen State Medical Institute (Turkmenistan) and the second Tashkent State Medical Institute (Uzbekistan). Partners of KSMA: Institute of Medicine prepares experts in three specialties General medicine - 6 years,Stomatology - 5 years, Pediatrics - 6 years Faculties of "General medicine" and "Pediatrics" are involved in production of highly skilled medical experts for systems of public health services of Kyrgyzstan and foreign countries in the highest priority areas of medical activities.The program of "General medicine" is aimed at training of the doctor (MD) with the subsequent post diploma specialization. The program is constructed according to standards of medical universities of the CIS and countries of Europe. The Institute offers both government supported training and that on a contractual basis. Training in Institute is conducted by the best teachers of the Kyrgyz Republic in groups with a small number of students. Since 2001 the КSМА uses a new method of training under the curriculum "General medicine" in English with simultaneous deeper learning of Russian. The curricula of "General medicine" programs are authorized by the Ministry of Education and Culture of the Kyrgyz Republic are designed according to the state educational standards, programs of leading world educational centers, in view of own methodical development which include the following disciplines: Program of pediatric faculty alongside with studying of fundamental and major medical subjects is focused on studying of features of children bodies, its preventive maintenance, diagnostics and treatment of children diseases.Curricula of pediatrics faculty include the following disciplines: The library is organized in 1939 together with KSMA. Today there are more than 400 000 books, 16 branches of the library, 5 reading halls. Apart from conventional books and journals, a CD-ROM facility having exhaustive electronic medical literature is also available. A number of magazines and newspapers are subscribed for the patients. Numerous books from all over the world provide a lot of information in drug services and clinical medicine. Medical library also provides knowledge-based information to employees. Medical staff and resident physicians to aid in-patient care excellence and operational efficiency. The library staff that is overseen by a library Committee looks after the day-to-day affairs of the library. In 2005, the electronic library in KSMA was established. There are two reading halls with computers with medical education materials. International students live in the student’s hostel, located close to the institution, in well arranged and furnished single or double rooms. In the building of the hostel there is the student’s canteen with a snack bar and billiard parlor, working as a cafe in the evening. Connection to the Internet is also available in every room. There is also mess system near the hostel but mostly foreign student's do self-cooking in the hostel. There is separate upper floor for female students. 
