 Lansoprazole ( ; INN) is a proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) which inhibits the stomach's production of gastric acids. It is manufactured by a number of companies worldwide under several brand names. In the United States it was first approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1995. Lansoprazole has been available as a generic drug since Prevacid patent protection expired on November 10, 2009. Since 2009 Lansoprazole has been available over the counter (OTC) in the U.S. in a 15 mg dose marketed by Novartis as Prevacid 24HR. Lansoprazole is a proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) in the same pharmacologic class as omeprazole. Lansoprazole has been marketed for many years and is one of several PPIs available. Lansoprazole is a racemate [1:1-mixture of the enantiomers dexlansoprazole (Kapidex) and levolansoprazole]. Dexlansoprazole is an enantiomerically pure active ingredient of a commercial drug as a result of the 'enantiomeric shift'. Lansoprazole's plasma elimination half-life is not proportional to the duration of the drug's effects to the person (i.e. gastric acid suppression). The mean plasma elimination half-life is 1.5 hours, and the effects of the drug last for over 24 hours after it has been used for 1 day or more. Lansoprazole, 30 mg administered nasogastrically, effectively controls intragastric pH and is an alternative to i.v. pantoprazole in patients who are unable to swallow solid dosage formulations. Lansoprazole is indicated for: Lansoprazole interacts with several other drugs, either due to its own nature or as a proton pump inhibitor. Side effects of proton pump inhibitors in general and lansoprazole in particular may include: Proton-pump inhibitors may be associated with a greater risk of hip fractures and Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. Antacid preparations such as lansoprazole by suppressing acid mediated break down of proteins, leads to an elevated risk of developing food and drug allergies. This happens due to undigested proteins then passing into the gastrointestinal tract where sensitisation occurs. It is unclear whether this risk occurs with only long-term use or with short-term use as well. Patients are frequently administered the drugs in intensive care as a protective measure against ulcers, but this use is also associated with a 30% increase in occurrence of pneumonia. Lansoprazole is available as a generic drug in the US, Russian Federation, UK, Canada, Belgium, Finland, France, Colombia, Italy, Sweden, and Mexico. The drug is also sold under several brand names, including: 
