 Laser blended vision, is a sophisticated laser eye treatment which rectifies short-sightedness (myopia) in one eye and long-sightedness (hyperopia) in the other eye. Primarily the treatment is for condition called presbyopia (progressive loss of the ability to focus on nearby objects) or other age-related eye conditions.Eye health: Presbyopia and your eyes. WebMD UK Ltd and Boots UK Ltd, 2009-2011. http://www.webmd.boots.com/eye-health/eye-health-presbyopia-eyes Blended vision can be achieved through laser eye surgery such as LASIK, PRK or LASEK, by correcting the dominant eye and the shape of the cornea, modifying it for reading vision and still maintaining good distance vision. In other words, one eye is focused for distance and the other eye is focused for near vision. The eyes are effectively working together to allow good vision at near, intermediate and far, without needing glasses. The effects of blended vision treatment can last between 5 to 10 years.Evans BJ. Monovision: A review. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2007;27:417-439. Laser blended vision provides a range of benefits, particularly in comparison to tradition monivision solutions, such as bifocal glasses or contact lenses. The key advantage of laser blended vision is the freedom from reading glasses. Over 98% of laser blended vision patients can read normal newsprint and over 90% can read the small print on medicine bottle inserts.What is Laser Blended Vision? Cons and Pros. LaserReviews.co.uk http://www.lasikreviews.co.uk/laser-vision-correction-lasik-blended.htm There is a creation of intermediate and far-intermediate distance zone of fusion, allowing the merging of images from each eye in the brain so no dissociation between the eyes. And due to increased depth of field in both eyes, the vision is significantly better than would otherwise be anticipated. The technology of the excimer laser provides maximum safety particularly as the eyetracker’s feedback frequency is higher. The laser treatment is a comfortable and gentle procedure and provides an extremely rapid rate of recovery. Laser technology, used for laser blended vision, include names like Carl Zeiss AG, Ziemer, IntraLase, Technolas. Carl Zeiss, along with contribution from Dan Reinstein, are regarded as the technology pioneers for blended vision treatment. All lasers can do monovision, but not all lasers can achieve the level of precision and results for laser blended vision like the Zeiss MEL 80 Excimer laser.Carl Zeiss Mditech AG (2010) “MEL80 Excimer Laser high performance meets versatility” Publicis v/2010 No. 0000001838386, Germany, USA. Dan Reinstein is a specialist ophthalmic surgeon in the UK and Medical Director at the London Vision Clinic, Harley St, London. He is certified in USA and Canada, and specializes in the field of refractive surgery. Professor Reinstein is an experienced research scientist in the laser eye surgery field and makes major contributions to the field. He pioneered the development and application of Artemis technology increasing the understanding of LASIK safety and accuracy. He developed the technology for laser blended vision, the LASIK treatment for presbyopia (aging eyes) now distributed by Carl Zeiss AG in the MEL80 laser platform and has enabled over 100,000 procedures to be performed in a year by 58 surgeons globally. During the preoperative screening, a complete examination of the eye is carried out at a consultation with the surgeon to determine if a patient is suitable for laser blended vision treatment. The dominant eye is determined and vision tested to identify the level of correction required for distance and near on the dominant eye and non-dominant eye. The analysis of ocular dominance also allows for ensuring the eyes can work together to create the blended vision. During the surgery, a corneal flap is created, during which there can be a sensation of slight pressure on the eye during the procedure. The left eye is covered and the right eye is opened and kept open by a speculum, the corneal flap is lifted and the laser correction is done – an ultra thin flap can be created for treatment of very high prescriptions. stores all the details of the dominant eye and what correction has to be done for each eye. The laser time for each eye is usually under 30 seconds. During the laser refractive surgery, the dominant eye is mainly corrected for distance vision and the non-dominant eye is corrected for near vision, whilst also increasing the range of focus for each eye. The entire procedure takes approximately 20–30 minutes and the visual recovery is rapid and there is very little pain afterwards. The recovery period post operative usually is between 24 hours and 7 days. Care is needed to not rub eyes and to wear eye shields during the night. The results are almost instantly available to the patient, where objects and people will seem more in focus. Laser blended vision treatment is suitable for people suffering from presbyopia. People mostly suffer from presbyopia, refractive error between the ages of 40–45 years. It occurs when the natural eye lens becomes less elastic and the muscle that pulls it into focus becomes less powerful as we age. In the young eye, the muscles contract to relax the ‘jelly like’ lens, changing its focal point to allow for distances and near focus. As we get older, our lenses continue to grow and layers of fibers are laid down making the lens less flexible. Patients treated using laser for blended vision, have an increased depth of field compared to traditional monovision.LASIK for myopic astigmatism and presbyopia using non-linear aspheric micro-monovision with the Carl Zeiss Meitec MEL 80 Platform. Journal of Refractive Surgery, Available at www.journalofrefractivesurgery.com/preprint.asp Posted online March 11, 2010Dan Z. Reinstein, Timothy J. Archer, Marine Gobbe There is a diminishing effect of the depth of field with use of contact lenses.Non-Linear Aspheric ablation profiles for presbyopic LASIK using the MEL80 and CRS Master Laser Blended Vision module. In: Lucio Buratto, Editor: LASIK with a Femtosecond Laser. [In Press]. Dan Z. Reinstein, Timothy J. Archer, Marine Gobbe According to a study conducted by Dr. Dan Reinstein, After a year of the laser treatment, 94.5% of patients achieved 20/20 vision.LASIK for hyperopic astigmatism and presbyopia using micro-monovision with the Carl Zeiss Meditec MEL80 platform. Journal of Refractive Surgery, 2009, Jan 25: 37-58. Dan Z Reinstein, Darren G Couch, Timothy J Archer The aim of this surgery is to produce one eye that sees objects close up, whilst the other sees objects that are far away. This can produce problems initially, as you may feel dizzy or nauseous until your brain adjusts to this new method. This is usually quickly, as the brain begins to ‘blend’ the images from both eyes together, to produce corrected vision. As with all laser eye procedures, there are risks and side effects of the treatment. You should understand these before you decide to go ahead. The Excimer laser enables safe treatment of higher levels of myopia,Corneal ablation depth readout of the MEL80 Exicmer Laser compared to Artemis three-dimensional very high-frequency digital ultrasound stromal measurements. Journal of Refractive Surgery Available www.journalofrefractivesurgery.com/preprint.asp. Posted online January 28, 2010. Dan Z Reinstein, Timothy J Archer, Marine Gobbe. and provide accurate calibration. After the laser surgery, one may require artificial tears and antibiotic eye drops which can caused blurred vision temporarily. Dryness of eyes can be a little uncomfortable for a few weeks after the surgery.Effect of corneal hydration on ultrasound velocity and backscatter. Ultrasound Med Biol, 2009, 35(5): 839-846 RH Silverman, MS Patel, O Gal, A Sarup, A Deobhakta, H Dababneh, DZ Reinstein, EJ Feleppa and DJ Coleman. Presbyopia is progressive and therefore a boost maybe required after some years. Typically the effects of laser blended vision surgery can last between 5–10 years. 
