 Latex allergy is a medical term encompassing a range of allergic reactions to natural rubber latex and synthetic rubber. (Synthetic) rubber is known to cause 2 of the 4 (or 5) types of hypersensitivity. The most serious and rare form, type I is an immediate and potentially life-threatening reaction, not unlike the severe reaction some people have to bee stings. Such reactions account for a significant proportion of perioperative anaphylactic reaction, especially in children with myelomeningocele. Testing for type I natural rubber latex allergy is through blood testing, such as RAST (radioallergosorbent test) identifies what types of IgE proteins trigger allergic reactions. While the standard for allergen testing is the skin prick test, there is no approved skin testing reagent for latex in the United States, though some other countries do have approved skin testing reagents. Type I natural rubber latex allergy is caused from IgE (immune) mediated reactions to proteins found in the Hevea brasiliensis tree, a type of rubber tree. Some people who are allergic to latex are also allergic to clothes, shoes, and other things that contain natural rubber latex—for example elastic bands, rubber gloves, condoms, pacifiers and baby-bottle nipples, balloons, cars, and clothing containing natural rubber based elastic. A Type I reaction can be triggered by exposure to airborne particles resulting from the inflation of balloons even if the person is not present while the balloons are being inflated. Also known as allergic contact dermatitis. This involves a delayed skin rash that is similar to poison ivy with blistering and oozing of the skin (see urushiol-induced contact dermatitis). Type IV reactions are caused by the chemicals used to process the (synthetic) rubber. Patch testing needs to be done to verify which type of chemical triggers the reaction. Once the chemical is identified, then the person can choose products that are not processed with that chemical. Type IV allergies caused by synthetic rubber products are an increasing problem for healthcare workers. It can also cause irritant contact dermatitis: The most common type of reaction. This causes dry, itchy, irritated areas on the skin, most often on the hands. It can be caused by the irritation of using gloves, or it can also be caused by exposure to other workplace products. Frequent washing of the hands, incomplete drying, exposure to hand sanitizers, and the talc-like powder coatings (zinc oxide, etc.) used with gloves can aggravate symptoms. Irritant contact dermatitis is not a true allergy. Estimates of latex sensitivity in the general population range from 0.8% to 8.2%, although not all will ever develop a noticeable allergic reaction. Synthetic latex compounds can be chemically identical to latex, producing the same allergic reactions. They also contain many of the same or similar accelerators. These synthetics do not have to be labeled as such. Some people who have latex allergy may also have an allergic response to any of a number of plant products, usually fruits. This is known as the latex-fruit syndrome. Fruits (and seeds) involved in this syndrome include banana, pineapple, avocado, chestnut, kiwi fruit, mango, passionfruit, fig, strawberry and soy. Some but not all of these fruits contain a form of latex. Hevein-like protein domains are a possible cause for allergen cross-reactivity between latex and banana or fruits in general (latex-fruit syndrome). Natural rubber latex contains several conformational epitopes located on several enzymes like Hev b 1, Hev b 2, Hev b 4, Hev b 5 and Hev b 6.02. FITkit is a latex allergen testing method for quantification of the major natural rubber latex (NRL) specific allergens: Hev b 1, Hev b 3, Hev b 5 and Hev b 6.02. 
