 Leader Stirling (19 January 1906 - 7 February 2003) was a missionary surgeon and former Health Minister in Tanzania. Born in England and raised in an ancient Scots family in Sussex Weald, Stirling attended Bishop's Stortford and the University of London. After a brief period of general practice, Stirling received a call from Universities' Mission to Central Africa, asking, “A doctor is urgently needed at Masasi. Can you go?” Stirling spent 14 years of service to the UMCA. During this time, he was based in Lulindi while traveling around to villages such as Newala, Masasi, Mkunya, and Chinako, eventually building hospitals and dispensaries in these places. Stirling also put an emphasis on training local nurses, establishing a precedent for official nurse recognition in Tanzania. Stirling's interest in scouting led to the establishment of a scouting program for Tanzanian youth. After his time with the Universities' Mission, Stirling joined the Benedictine Mission, and was sent to build a hospital in Mnero. In 1961 Stirling became a Tanzanian citizen, and in 1973, he was made Health Minister by Julius Nyerere. Stirling spent 14 years based in Lulindi, as a visiting doctor to surrounding hospitals and dispensaries. Stirling placed importance on keeping high standards, even with primitive facilities, and training local nurses. Stirling simultaneously built hospitals in Lulindi and Newala. - in memorial to the late Dr. Culver James, whose legacy provided much of the funds- built with "green", or sun-dried, bricks Facilities - operating theatre- main outpatient building- dispensary- laboratory- built-in stove, fired from outside by burning uncut logs: key component to this hospital, as it was used to sterilize instruments and boil and distill water- later expansion included additional wards, a new operating theatre, X-ray, and a maternity block Sister Anne helped lead the building of this hospital as Stirling traveled between Lulindi and Newala. At the start, the hospital began to receive 300 patients daily, increasing to 400 and later more than 500. Facilities - outpatient building- patients' huts- corrugated iron roof: facilitated collection of water to help alleviate the ongoing water problem- 50 beds Staff Starting staff included:- 2 sisters- 2 African Medical Assistants- 1 African nurse- 4 dressers In addition to hospitals, Stirling set up dispensaries to provide more locations of closer distances to people and to lift strain from the hospitals. During his time with the UMCA, Stirling saw the need for nurse training, an idea new and revolutionary in Tanzania. The challenge to training nurses was that local school heads would hold onto their brightest students, encouraging them to go into teacher-training, under the impression that teaching was the onlyhonorable occupation. Mrs. Thekla Mchauru, the first Tanganyikan woman to qualify as a teacher, was the first nurse to complete Miss Bell's course in Lulindi, qualifying in 1940, to become a registered nurse, the first Tanganyikan woman to do so. Miss Bell insisted on high standards, and her and Stirling's syllabus, based on the British model, was later adopted by the government, implemented all over the country in new schools training new nurses. During his time in Lulindi and the surrounding area, Stirling dealt with a variety of tropical and non-tropical diseases. - yaws- bilharzia- hookworm infestation- malaria- leprosy- amoebic dysentery- less common diseases include relapsing fever, sleeping sickness, scabies, eye infection, and ulcers - pneumonia- meningitis- septic infections- measles- whooping cough- cancer 
