 Leukonychia (or leuconychia), also known as white nails or milk spots, is a medical term for white discoloration appearing on nails. It is derived from the Greek words leuko ("white") and onyx ("nail"). The most common cause is injury to the base of the nail (the matrix) where the nail is formed. It is harmless and most commonly caused by minor injuries that occur while the nail is growing. Contrary to popular belief, the presence of leukonychia is not a sign of excess or deficiency of calcium or vitamins in the diet but rather less commonly a medical sign of hypoalbuminaemia of chronic liver disease. It is more commonly found on fingernails than toenails. There is no effective treatment for leukonychia. The white marks and spots gradually disappear as the nail grows outward from the matrix with the nail plate. This condition is a whitening of the entire nail. This may be due to hypoalbuminaemia (low albumin), which is caused by the nephrotic syndrome (a form of kidney failure), liver failure, protein malabsorption and protein-losing enteropathies. A genetic condition, and a side effect of sulphonamides, a family of antibiotics can also cause this appearance. This condition is whitening of parts of the nail. Generally characterised by white dots. There are several types of this condition. Leukonychia striata, transverse leukonychia, or Mee's lines are a whitening or discoloration of the nail in bands or "stria" that run parallel the lunula (nail base). It may be caused by cirrhosis, chemotherapy, or physical injury to the nail matrix (e.g., excessive nail "tapping", or slamming in a car door). Alternatively, the condition can be caused by arsenic, lead, or other heavy metal poisoning.The tendency toward leukonychia striata is sometimes inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. In other cases, it can be attributed to vigorous manicuring, to trauma, or to a wide variety of systemic illnesses. In many patients, there is no obvious cause, and the streaks resolve spontaneously. There is a similar condition called Muehrcke's lines (apparent leukonychia) which differs from leukonychia in that the lines fade with digital compression and do not migrate with the growth of the nail. Also known as "true" leukonychia, this is the most common form of leukonychia, in which small white spots appear on the nails. Picking and biting of the nails are a prominent cause in young children and nail biters. In most cases, when white spots appear on a single or a couple of fingers or toes, the most common cause is injury to the base (matrix) of the nail. When this is the case, white spots disappear after around eight weeks, which is the amount of time necessary for nails to regrow completely. A doctor will take a thorough medical history, and may test liver and kidney function. 
