 Linda Prine is an American family physician, author, professor, consultant, cyclist, non-profit founder, academy chair, health care director, fellowship director, and residency teacher best known nationally for her award-winning work as a reproductive rights and universal health care activist. Prine promotes making abortion care part of family health care. She is the Medical Director of the Reproductive Health Access Project, of which she is a co-founder. Prine holds a large number of the top positions in her field, including: Moreover, Prine is a consultant for the Center for Reproductive Health Education in Family Medicine at Montefiore Medical Center. And lastly, Prine is a teacher at Planned Parenthood. Linda Prine's work has been published in dozens of journals including American Family Physician and American Journal of Public Health. She has been profiled and featured in dozens of publications, including the front page of The New York Times and in Scientific American,CNN, ABC News, Buzz Feed, the blog Jezebel and the Women's Media Center. Prine presents her work at national conferences, grand rounds, and workshops across America. Linda Prine is also at the forefront of several bicycle activism movements, serving as the chief medical representative for the Transportation Alternatives advisory board and authoring letters to the Mayor of New York City, representing hundreds of doctors at the New York State Academy of Family Physicians. She has written for The New York Daily News in support for more bike lanes and testified for New York City Council in support of tackling obesity with more and better bike lanes. Prine is a cyclist herself, finishing all 100 miles of the New York's City Century bike race several times. Linda Prine was the lead author of a 2001-02 study on medical abortion's safety in family practices. The study was the first ever to focus on the outcomes of medical abortion in a family practice setting. It concluded that provision of medical abortion by family physicians is safe, effective, and feasible. The study, first published in the Journal of the American Board of Family Practice, was considered groundbreaking and subsequently feature in several prestigious publications including Medscape Medical. The conclusion that medical abortion has similar efficacy and patient satisfaction when offered in a family medicine practice or at a reproductive health specialty clinic reassured family physicians that medical abortion can be offered safely in their practices. The study was praised nationwide and cited in several subsequent articles on the same topic. Linda Prine was the lead author of a 2003 article published by Beth Israel's Residency Program in Urban Family Practice, titled ""Integrating medical abortion into a residency practice." The article detailed the most successful methods of integrating medical abortion into a residency practice, using the results of a study that involved the surveying of staff, faculty, residents and colleagues and different ways in which these concerns were addressed. The work was praised as insightful and thorough research that made a significant impact on the future integration of medical abortion into residency practicies. The article was cited in over a dozen future articles on similar topics. Linda Prine was the co-author in a 2006 study titled "Hospital Religious Affiliation and Emergency Contraceptive Prescribing Practices." In the study's results, within 7 out of the 9 clinical scenarios, clinicians from non–religiously affiliated institutions would prescribe Emergency Contraception more readily than those in religiously affiliated institutions. The article was published in the American Journal of Public Health and cited in numerous publications including Canadian Family Physician. Other notable contributions Linda Prine was the co-author in an article titled "Medical abortion and activism in medicine," published in the textbook "21st Century Sexualities: Contemporary Issues in Health, Education, and Rights." The article highlights how the 2000 FDA approval of mifepristone opened the doors for a new age of reproductive rights activism, growing among physicians and medical students in which family physicians are being trained to become abortion providers. Linda Prine is one of the founders of the Reproductive Health Access Project (RHAP). Through advocacy programs, training programs, and mentoring programs, RHAP assists family physicians and other clinicians in integrating birth control and abortion into routine medical care. The central goal of RHAP is to work towards a future in which American women and teenagers at every socioeconomic level are provided with birth control and abortion from their primary care physician. Linda Prine is also at the forefront of several bicycle activism movements, serving as the chief medical representative for the Transportation Alternatives advisory board and authoring letters to the Mayor of New York City, representing hundreds of doctors at the New York State Academy of Family Physicians. She has written for The New York Daily News in support for more bike lanes and testified for New York City Council in support of tackling obesity with more and better bike lanes. Prine is a highly accomplished cyclist herself, finishing all 100 miles of the New York's City Century bike race several times. Each year Physician's for Reproductive Choice and Health honors a reproductive health care physician who provides outstanding abortion care. According to their website the "William K. Rashbaum, MD, Abortion Provider Award honors a physician who provides outstanding abortion services and serves as an inspirational leader for colleagues, residents, and medical students. Rashbaum (1926-2005) was a cofounder of PRCH, a gifted obstetrician and gynecologist, a respected teacher, and a passionate advocate for women’s rights." Prine's acceptance speech can be read online here: http://www.prch.org/linda-prine-speech-rashbaum-tiller-2012 Linda Prine was a runner up for the award "Leadership for a Changing World" in 2005. The award recognizes and supports community leaders across America who are effectively tackling tough social issues. Linda Prine won the Teacher of the Year award at her Beth Israel Family Medicine Residency. She was voted best teacher by her residents. 
