 Plants cannot move to escape their predators, so they must have other means of protecting themselves from herbivorous animals. Some plants have physical defenses such as thorns, but by far the most common protection is chemical. Over millennia, natural selection has produced a complicated and vast array of chemical compounds that deter herbivores. Tannin is a compound that emerged relatively early in the evolutionary history of plants, while more complex molecules such as polyacetylenes are found in younger groups of plants such as the Asterales. Many of the plant defense compounds arose to defend against consumption by insects, although when livestock or humans consume such plants, they may also experience negative effects, ranging from mild discomfort to death. Many of these poisonous compounds also have important medicinal benefits. There are so many kinds of plant defenses that there are many unanswered questions about them. Questions include (1) which plants have which type of defenses, (2) which herbivores are the plants defended against, (3) what are the chemical structures of the compounds that provide defense, (4) and what are the potential medical uses of these compounds? This is still an active area of research with important implications for understanding plant evolution, and for medical research. Below is an extensive, if incomplete, list of plants containing poisonous parts that pose a serious risk of illness, injury, or death to humans or animals.Human fatalities caused by poisonous plants – especially resulting from accidental ingestion – are rare in the USA. Many food plants possess toxic parts, are toxic unless processed, or are toxic at certain stages of their life. Notable examples include: J-Agric-Food-Chem. 2003 May 7; 51(10): 2964–73 Cooking at high temperatures (over 170 °C or 340 °F) also partly destroys the toxin. However, exposure to light, physical damage, and age increase glycoalkaloid content within the tuber, the highest concentrations occurring just underneath the skin. Tubers which are exposed to light turn green from chlorophyll synthesis, thus giving a visual clue as to areas of the tuber that may have become more toxic; however, this does not provide a definitive guide, as greening and glycoalkaloid accumulation can occur independently of each other. Some varieties of potato contain greater glycoalkaloid concentrations than others; breeders developing new varieties test for this, and sometimes have to discard an otherwise promising cultivar. Breeders try to keep solanine levels below 200 mg/kg (200 ppmw). However, when these commercial varieties turn green, even they can approach concentrations of solanine of 1000 mg/kg (1000 ppmw). The U.S. National Toxicology Program suggests that the average American consume at most 12.5 mg/day of solanine from potatoes (the toxic dose is actually several times this, depending on body weight). Douglas L. Holt, the State Extension Specialist for Food Safety at the University of Missouri, notes that no reported cases of potato-source solanine poisoning have occurred in the U.S. in the last 50 years, and most cases involved eating green potatoes or drinking potato-leaf tea. 
