 Legionellosis is a potentially fatal infectious disease caused by gram negative, aerobic bacteria belonging to the genus Legionella. The first reported outbreak was in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1976 during a Legionnaires Convention at the Bellevue-Stratford Hotel. Year !! City !! Venue !! Source !! Cases !! Deaths !! Fatality rate Notes 1976 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 1976 Philadelphia legionellosis outbreak 1985 Stafford, England, United Kingdom Stafford District Hospital 1999 Bovenkarspel, Netherlands 1999 Bovenkarspel legionellosis outbreak 2000 Melbourne, Australia Melbourne Aquarium 2001 Murcia, Spain Hospital 2002 Barrow-in-Furness, UK 2002 Barrow-in-Furness legionellosis outbreak 2005 Toronto, Canada Seven Oaks Home for the Aged 2005 Fredrikstad, Norway factory 2008 New Brunswick, New Jersey Saint Peter's University Hospital 2010 Wales, United Kingdom South Wales Valleys 2011 Los Angeles, California Playboy Mansion 2012 Québec City, Canada Lower Québec City 2012 Calp, Spain AR Diamante Beach Hotel 2012 Edinburgh, Scotland, UK South west of Edinburgh 2012 Chicago, Illinois JW Marriott Hotel 2012 Auckland, New Zealand Unknown 2012 Stoke-on-Trent, England Warehouse, Fenton The guidance issued by the UK government's Health and Safety Executive (HSE) now recommends that microbiological monitoring for wet cooling systems, using a dipslide, should be performed weekly. The guidance now also recommends that routine testing for legionella bacteria in wet cooling systems be carried out at least quarterly, and more frequently when a system is being commissioned, or if the bacteria have been identified on a previous occasion.Further non-statutory UK guidance from the Water Regulations Advisory Scheme now exists for pre-heating of water in applications such as solar water heating systems. The City of Garland, Texas requires yearly testing for legionella bacteria at cooling towers at apartment buildings. Malta requires twice yearly testing for Legionella bacteria at cooling towers and water fountains. Malta prohibits the installation of new cooling towers and evaporative condensers at health care facilities and schools. The Texas Department of State Health Services has provided guidelines for hospitals to detect and prevent the spread of nosocomial infection due to legionella.The European Working Group for Legionella Infections (EWGLI) was established in 1986 within the European Union framework to share knowledge and experience about potential sources of Legionella and their control. This group has published guidelines about the actions to be taken to limit the number of colony forming units (i.e., the "aerobic count") of micro-organisms per mL at 30 °C (minimum 48 hours incubation): Aerobic count !! Legionella !! Action required 10,000 or less 1,000 or less System under control. more than 10,000up to 100,000 more than 1,000up to 10,000 Review program operation. The count should be confirmed by immediate re-sampling. If a similar count is found again, a review of the control measures and risk assessment should be carried out to identify any remedial actions. more than 100,000 more than 10,000 Implement corrective action. The system should immediately be re-sampled. It should then be 'shot dosed' with an appropriate biocide, as a precaution. The risk assessment and control measures should be reviewed to identify remedial actions. Almost all natural water sources contain Legionella and their presence should not be taken as an indication of a problem. The tabled figures are for total aerobic plate count, cfu/ml at 30 °C (minimum 48 hours incubation) with colony count determined by the pour plate method according to ISO 6222(21) or spread plate method on yeast extract agar. Legionella isolation can be conducted using the method developed by the US Center for Disease Control using buffered charcoal yeast extract agar with antibiotics. Many other governmental agencies, cooling tower manufacturers, and industrial trade organizations have developed design and maintenance guidelines for preventing or controlling the growth of Legionella in cooling towers. However, in the US, there are no regulations requiring testing or maintaining any specified levels in these facilities. The bacteria grow best in warm water, like the kind found in hot tubs, cooling towers, hot water tanks, large plumbing systems, or parts of the air-conditioning systems of large buildings. Indoor ornamental fountains have been confirmed as a cause of Legionnaires' disease outbreaks, in which submerged lighting as a heat source was attributed to the outbreak in all documented cases. Controlling the growth of Legionella in ornamental fountains is touched on in many of the listed guidelines. However, specific guidelines for solar water heating systems Adding an antibacterial agent to the automobiles' windshield system's reservoir is also recommended Legionellae have been discovered in up to 40% of freshwater environments and have been in up to 80% of freshwater sites by PCR hybridization assay. Legionella bacteria themselves can be inactivated by UV light. However, Legionella bacteria that grow and reproduce in amoebae or that are sheltered in corrosion particles cannot be killed by UV light alone. Legionella will grow in water at temperatures from . However, the bacteria reproduce at the greatest rate in stagnant water at temperatures of . Copper-Silver ionization is an effective industrial control and prevention process to eradicate Legionella in potable water distribution systems and cooling towers found in health facilities, hotels, nursing homes and most large buildings. In 2003, ionization became the first such hospital disinfection process to have fulfilled a proposed four-step modality evaluation; by then it had been adopted by over 100 hospitals. Additional studies indicate ionization is superior to thermal eradication. A 2011 study by Lin, Stout and Yu [2] found Copper-Silver ionization to be the only Legionella control technology which has been validated through a 4 step scientific approach. A recent research study provided evidence that Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires' disease, can travel airborne at least 6 km from its source. In 2000, ASHRAE issued guidelines to maintain water systems and to decrease the chances of Legionnaires' disease transmission. The guidelines were not valued because legionella multiply in such temperatures. On the other hand, a lot of states had regulations that limited temperatures in health care facilities in order to reduce scalding injuries. It was previously believed that transmission of the bacterium was restricted to much shorter distances. A team of French scientists reviewed the details of an epidemic of Legionnaires' disease that took place in Pas-de-Calais in northern France in 2003–2004. There were 86 confirmed cases during the outbreak, of whom 18 died. The source of infection was identified as a cooling tower in a petrochemical plant, and an analysis of those affected in the outbreak revealed that some infected people lived as far as 6–7 km from the plant. A study of Legionnaires' disease cases in May 2005 in Sarpsborg, Norway concluded that: "The high velocity, large drift, and high humidity in the air scrubber may have contributed to the wide spread of Legionella species, probably for >10 km. "... In 2010 a study by the UK Health Protection Agency reported that 20% of cases may be caused by infected windscreen washer systems filled with pure water. The finding came after researchers spotted that professional drivers are five times more likely to contract the disease. No cases of infected systems were found whenever a suitable washer fluid was used. Temperature affects the survival of Legionella as follows: <blockquote style="background: #F9F9F9; border: 1px solid black; padding: 1em; width: 60%"> </blockquote> Removing slime, which can carry legionellae when airborne, may be an effective control process. 
