 This is a list of Hatzolah chapters. Hatzolah is an all volunteer Emergency medical services organization staffed by Jewish Orthodox Emergency medical technicians and Paramedics. Locations where chapters are situated are listed alphabetically by geography. Each neighborhood or city in Hatzalah operates independently. There are some exceptions, where there is a tight affiliation with neighboring Hatzolahs, a loose affiliation of neighboring Hatzolahs, or some other basic level of cooperation. Hatzolah in Israel exists as two different organizations: Hatzolah Israel and Ichud Hatzolah (rendered in English as United Hatzalah). Hatzolah Israel was the original organization and Ichud Hatzolah was formed in 2006, mostly with chapters that had been part of Hatzolah Israel.Each of the organizations has many local chapters, close to 1,000 volunteers apiece, and provides coordinated response for larger emergencies or extra coverage across multiple localities. Chevra Hatzalah Mexico was founded in 1997 by Mr. Chaim Silver. The branch is run by the Syrian-Sephardic community under supervision of Mr. Abraham Levy who is the CEO. It has 70 full-time volunteers, seven ambulances and six locations (five bases and a headquarters). It also has access to a helicopter and air transport. All dispatchers are Volunteer EMS for immediate intervention and instructions, some of them certified in Advanced Critical Care Medicine and Emergency response, actually working for prestigious Mexican Hospitals and National Medical Centers. Volunteers have plenty of experience in Trauma and Internal Medicine emergencies, having training in the Mexican Red Cross´s Ambulance Center. The branch covers the Jewish areas of Tecamachalco, Bosques, Polanco, Interlomas, and the weekend resort city Cuernavaca. It have full-time operating bases in three major Jewish areas, having its Central Base in Tecamachalco, a dense populated Jewish area in Mexico City. Los Angeles has a chapter which provides Basic life support level care and relies on the Los Angeles Fire Department for Advanced life support paramedic care and transport.. On August 31, 2009 they began direct transport of patients to area hospitals using their own ambulance. The Orthodox community in Waterbury, CT, centered around the yeshiva there, has its own Hatzolah. Since January 2010, Miami-Dade has a chapter that provides Basic life support response and relies on Miami-Dade Fire Rescue Department Miami Beach Fire Rescue Department for Advanced life support paramedic care and transport. Hatzalah Chicago provides first responder coverage for Lincolnwood, Peterson Park, Skokie, and West Rogers Park. It does not do transports. Baltimore started a Hatzalah in 2007 as a first-responder-only service with transport to be done by Baltimore City ambulance units. Currently, Hatzalah of Baltimore does provide Advanced Life Support (ALS) services to the Northwest Baltimore community provided it is in their response area. New Jersey has many Hatzolah organizations throughout the State. Each NJ affiliate maintains its own emergency phone number, dispatchers, and radio frequencies. While they are not officially connected, as with NYC Hatzolah, many of them are nevertheless loosely affiliated, sharing classes or working at each other's events. On occasion, all five divisions have worked together to provide joint event coverage or to share training classes. Per New Jersey law, volunteers with proper permits may equip their cars with blue flashing lights and electronic airhorns, but not red flashing lights, nor sirens. Coordinators' ("officers'") personal vehicles, and any vehicle owned by a squad with a 'No Fee' license plate, are permitted the use of red flashing lights and sirens; not all branches make use of these allowances. Paramedic (ALS) units in New Jersey are only run by hospitals, per state law. The limitation to BLS is not just for Hatzolah and other volunteer agencies: all New Jersey "911" municipal-run EMS services are also limited to BLS. However, see Lakewood below for a special exception. Hatzalah of Union County, with "U-prefix" unit numbers. Union County is geographically and organizationally separate from Union City. With three active ambulances, "the U" also responds to nearby towns including Linden, Union Township, Roselle and Roselle Park, and even to businesses in Newark where slow EMS response may allow the Hatzalah ambulance to complete the 12-14 minute trip from Elizabeth or Hillside before a Newark city crew arrives. Hatzalah of Union County also covers the Jersey Gardens Mall, Newark Liberty Airport, and nearby stretches of the New Jersey Turnpike and Garden State Parkway. Two ambulances are located in the greater Elizabeth/Hillside area and the third is located in Roselle. The largest branch in New Jersey, with "L-prefix" unit numbers. Unique to New Jersey, Lakewood has a Paramedic (ALS) unit. The ALS unit is owned and run by MONOC, but the Paramedics are also Lakewood Hatzolah members, and the ambulance was donated by Hatzolah Lakewood to MONOC. This unusual arrangement meets New Jersey's strict hospital-based ALS rules, while giving Hatzolah its own ALS coverage. Also unique, Lakewood has its own Rescue (extrication) unit. Hatzolah of Passaic/Clifton EMS. The neighboring cities have a contiguous Orthodox Jewish community, with most of the community and its institutions on the Passaic side. Likewise, Hatzolah of Passaic/Clifton, with "P-prefix" unit numbers, covers both parts of the community, but is primarily based in Passaic, with some members and management in Clifton. This Hatzolah is geographically near Union City, and can provide extra coverage for them. Hatzolah of Passaic/Clifton has 30 active members, 20 dispatchers, two active ambulances and a third on standby, for a community of about 2,000 households. Hatzolah of Union City http://www.hatzolahuc.com/, is run out of Mosded Sanz-Zviel, which is the center of the Chasidic community in Union City. It is the only Chasidic Hatzolah in New Jersey. Union City is located in Hudson County, and is not related to Union County. Union City uses VHF radios, while all other New Jersey chapters use UHF radios. Canarsie/Mill BasinThe Canarsie/Mill Basin chapter was originally just the Canarsie division. As the Canarsie Orthodox neighborhood declined, and the Mill Basin one grew, Canarsie started taking more calls and members from nearby Mill Basin, and is now primarily a Mill Basin operation. Canarsie/Mill Basin also covers nearby Georgetown. There are parts of the Brooklyn neighborhood of Mill Basin that border Madison/Midwood/East Midwood, so there is some overlap in coverage with Flatbush. Catskill MountainsThis chapter is part of Central Hatzalah of New York City. While the Catskills have a year-round operation, the vast majority of their activity is in July and August, when summer residents arrive. Fleischmanns Kiryas Joel Monroe, NYThe Chasidic community in Kiryas Joel (Monroe), NY has a chapter. Uniquely, it operates separately from all other New York State Hatzolah organizations. New SquareThis chapter is a breakoff from the Rockland Hatzoloh chapter. Uniquely, the chapter has female Certified First Responders who respond to calls involving obstetrics related emergencies. New York City Central This chapter has sixteen local divisions which share rabbinic counsel, radio frequencies, central dispatch and lobbying, but have separate fundraising and management. Catskills, the Five Towns, and Yonkers are the only areas outside of New York City covered by NYC chapters.The chapter has a central dispatching network with teams of 2 volunteer dispatchers working in tandem. Each dispatch team works several hours on a shift. The chapter also uses a mobile command center for dealing with large events.New York City chapters include Boro Park, Canarsie/Mill Basin, Crown Heights, Flatbush, Lower East Side, Midtown, Queens, Richmond, Riverdale, Rockaways/Lawrence, Seagate, Staten Island, Upper East Side, Upper West Side, Washington Heights, and Williamsburg. Rockland CountyThis chapter is unaffiliated with the New York Central Hatzolah. It has distinct rabbinical oversight primarily due to several large Hasidic communities affiliated with Rockland Hatzolah. Westchester County Philadelphia's Hatzolah has limited service, providing first responder aid only in the Northeast area. Hatzolah of Philadelphia transports are provided by calling in either Patriot Ambulance, or, when the situation warrants, 9-1-1. Patriot Ambulance is a local paid ambulance service owned by a community member. Its owner has also provided Philadelphia Hatzolah with financial assistance, training, and medical guidance to ensure excellence and continuity in patient care. Philadelphia has nine responders, all state certified. Some members are full-time professional EMTs or Paramedics. Hatzolah 
