 The London Ambulance Service (LAS) is a National Health Service trust that is responsible for responding to medical emergencies in Greater London with its ambulances and other response vehicles, and over 4,500 staff at its disposal. It is one of 12 ambulance trusts in England providing emergency medical services, and is part of the National Health Service, receiving direct government funding for its role. There is no charge to patients for use of the service, as every person in England has the right to the attendance of an ambulance in an emergency. The LAS responds to over 1.5 million calls for assistance every year. All 999 calls from the public are answered at the Emergency Operations Centre (EOC) in Waterloo, which then dispatches the appropriate resources. To assist, the service's command and control system is linked electronically with the equivalent system for London's Metropolitan Police. This means that police updates regarding specific jobs will be updated directly on the computer-aided dispatch (CAD) log, to be viewed by the EOC and the resources allocated to the job. The first permanent ambulance service in London was established by the Metropolitan Asylums Board (MAB) in 1897, and was used to transport patients to its hospitals. In 1930, the work of the MAB was taken over by the London County Council, who also took charge of the fleet of 156 ambulances. During World War II, the London Auxiliary Ambulance Service was operated by over 10,000 auxiliaries, mainly women, from all walks of life. They ran services from 139 Auxiliary Stations across London. A plaque at one of the last to close, Station 39 in Weymouth Mews, near Portland Place, commemorates their wartime service. In 1948 that the National Health Service Act (1946) made it a requirement for ambulances to be available for anyone who needed them. The present-day London Ambulance Service was formed in 1965 by the amalgamation of nine existing services in London and in 1974, after a reorganisation of the NHS, the LAS was transferred from the control of local government to the South West Thames Regional Health Authority. On 1 April 1996, the LAS left the control of the South West Thames Regional Health Authority and became an NHS trust. As an NHS Trust, the LAS has a Trust Board consisting of a chief executive, a chairman, five LAS executive directors and five external non-executive directors. The chief executive and Chief Ambulance Officer have responsibility for oversight of seven directorates: Operations are directed from service headquarters in Waterloo Road which houses the Emergency Operations Centre (EOC) for despatching emergency service vehicles and also coordinates major incident responses or from a back-up control room in east London should the main control room become compromised.Special events in London are co-ordinated from the Service's event control room, also located in east London, or from the Metropolitan Police control room as appropriate. During mass casualty incidents, the command structure works on three (or four) levels: gold, silver and bronze. This system was used effectively in response to the suicide bombings on 7 July 2005. Operational roles in the LAS include: The LAS operates around 900 ambulances. In addition it can deploy around 100 rapid-response units in various cars, motorcycles, or bicycles.Although not a part of the LAS, the London Air Ambulance can also be deployed by, and for, the LAS from its base at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel. As well as accidents and emergencies, the LAS operates a 195-vehicle patient transport service (PTS). Previously a centrally funded service, this element of the LAS is now subject to an open market and is required to tender for work from primary care trusts (PCTs) and other NHS bodies. As well as being contracted by a number of London hospitals and PCTs to take patients to and from their pre-arranged hospital or clinic appointments, the PTS responds to ad-hoc journey requests and provides specialist transfer facilities. The LAS plays a significant role whenever an incident causes mass caualties in London. Examples include: In 2000, the LAS faced funding difficulties and an increase in the volume of 999 calls, and it was criticised for poor performance in its response times. The service was sued for negligence in the case of Kent v Griffiths. The chief executive at the time, Michael Honey, left his post after talks with other members of LAS management. In 2010 the service lost its funding for the emergency care practitioner (ECP) role and existing ECPs were told they must change to a different role within the service, or leave. A fire in the basement of its Waterloo base in October 2010 caused the LAS to relocate the EOC to the back-up control room in east London due to an interruption to the building's power supply. The service took the step of urging the public to find other means of transport to hospital for anyone suffering non-life-threatening injuries. In 2013, the LAS was named by the Care Quality Commission as one of 26 healthcare providers in England failing to operate with sufficient staff. Concerns were raised in internal LAS documents over the performance of radios and communication equipment used in the emergency operations after the 7/7 attacks. Again, the sheer volume of emergency calls received made radio communications difficult and put pressure on staff in the ambulance control room. Staff were also hampered in their use of mobile phones as the mobile phone networks were temporarily brought down during the day. In July 2009 the new radio system recommended after the bombings was rolled out. Despite the changes after 7/7, the LAS was criticised in 2010 for failures to provide fully working radios to its frontline staff. Health and safety inspections found that some radios failed during heavy rain and staff sometimes had to do without. Crews also raised concerns that the panic buttons on their radios did not work properly. On 26 October 1992 the LAS started to use a new computer-assisted dispatch (CAD) system, known as LASCAD. Poorly designed and implemented, its introduction led to significant delays in the assigning of ambulances, with anecdotal reports of 11-hour waits. Media reports at the time claimed that up to 30 people may have died as a result of the chaos. The then-chief executive, John Wilby, resigned shortly afterwards. This failure is often cited in case studies of poor engineering management. A software upgrade in July 2006 led to repeated system crashes during August. As a result, dispatchers had to go back to old pen-and-paper methods. On 8 June 2011 the LAS attempted to implement a new CAD system, called CommandPoint, costing £18 million and built by Northrop Grumman, an American aerospace and defense technology company. During its implementation it developed technical problems and was replaced by a pen-and-paper method for several hours until a decision was taken to revert to the previous system, CTAK, in the early hours of 9 June. It was later announced that a review of the difficulties experienced would be undertaken. A second attempt at implementing CommandPoint was due to take place on 28 March 2012. The trust was considering terminating its contract with Northrop Grumman if the re-attempt to go live with the new system failed. Other London emergency services: 
