 Lymphoid leukemia or lymphocytic leukemia is a type of leukemia affecting circulating lymphocyte cells. This is in contrast to lymphoma, which is a solid tumor of the same type of cells. Lymphocytes are a subtype of white blood cells. Most lymphoid leukemias involve a particular subtype of lymphocytes, the B cell. Historically, they have been most commonly divided by the stage of maturation at which the clonal (neoplastic) lymphoid population stopped maturing: However, the influential WHO Classification (published in 2001) emphasized a greater emphasis on cell lineage. To this end, lymphoid leukemias can also be divided by the type of cells affected: The most common type of lymphoid leukemia is B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. B-cell leukemia describes several different types of lymphoid leukemia which affect B cells. Comparison of most common B-cell leukemias !! Incidence !! Histopathology !! Cell markers !! Comments B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (ICD-O: 9823/3) 30% of all leukemias. Also 3 to 4% of lymphomas in adults Small resting lymphocytes mixed with variable number of large activated cells. Lymph nodes are diffusely effaced CD5, surface immunoglobulin Occurs in older adults. Usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow and spleen. Most patients have peripheral blood involvement. Indolent. Precursor B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (ICD-O: 9835/3-9836/3) 85% of acute leukemias in childhood, Less common in adults Lymphoblasts with irregular nuclear contours, condensed chromatin, small nucleoli and scant cytoplasm without granules. TdT, CD19 Usually presents as acute leukemia Other types include (with ICD-O code): T-cell leukemia describes several different types of lymphoid leukemias which affect T cells. The most common T-cell leukemia is precursor T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia. It causes 15% of acute leukemias in childhood, and also 40% of lymphomas in childhood. It is most common in adolescent males. Its morphology is identical to that of precursor B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia. Cell markers include TdT, CD2, CD7. It often presents as a mediastinal mass because of involvement of the thymus. It is highly associated with NOTCH1 mutations. Other types include: In practice, it can be hard to distinguish T-cell leukemia from T-cell lymphoma, and they are often grouped together. 
