 A major depressive episode is the cluster of symptoms of major depressive disorder. The description has been formalised in psychiatric diagnostic criteria such as the DSM-IV and ICD-10, and is characterized by severe, highly persistent depression, and a loss of interest or pleasure in everyday activities, which is often manifested by lack of appetite, chronic fatigue, and sleep disturbances (somnipathy). The individual may think about suicide, and indeed have an increased risk of actually attempting suicide. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth Edition. In addition to the emotional pain endured by those suffering from depression, significant economic costs are associated with depression. In fact, American and Canadian studies have indicated that the costs associated with depression are greater than those associated with hypertension, and equal to those of heart disease, diabetes, and back problems. [1] Medscape (subscription needed) The criteria below are based on the formal DSM-IV criteria for a Major Depressive Episode. A diagnoses of major depressive episode requires that the patient has—over a two-week period—experienced five or more of the symptoms below, and these must be outside the patient's normal behaviour. Either depressed mood or decreased interest or pleasure must be one of the five (although both are frequently concomitant). In diagnosing the symptoms a trained therapist must take the following into account: If left untreated, a typical major depressive episode may last for about six months, while about 20% of these episodes can last two years or more, with 50% of depressive episodes ending spontaneously. However, even after the major depressive episode is over, 20% to 30% of patients have residual symptoms, which can be distressing and associated with disability. Regarding the treatment of major depressive episodes of severe intensity (multiple symptoms, minimal mood reactivity, severe functional impairment), combined psychotherapy plus antidepressant medications are more effective than psychotherapy alone. Estimates of the numbers of people suffering from major depressive episodes and Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) vary significantly. Between 10% and 25% of women, and between 5% and 12% of men will suffer a major depressive episode. Fewer people, between 5% and 9% of women and between 2% and 3% of men, will have MDD, or full-blown depression. Depression occurs nearly twice as often in adolescent and adult females as in males, and the peak period of development is between the ages of 25 and 44 years. Onset of major depressive episodes or MDD often occurs to people in their mid-20s, and less often to those over 65. Prepubescent girls and boys are affected equally. Additionally, socio-economic or environmental factors do not appear to have any bearing on the incidence of a major depressive episode or MDD. 
