 Makerere University School of Medicine (MUSM), also known as Makerere University Medical School is the school of medicine of Makerere University, Uganda's oldest university. The medical school is the oldest medical school in Eastern Africa, having been part of the Makerere University, since 1924. The school provides medical education at diploma, undergraduate and postgraduate levels. The school's campus is located on Mulago Hill, in northeast Kampala, Uganda's capital and largest city. The clinical teaching disciplines of the medical school are integrated with the Mulago Hospital Complex and with the Makerere University School of Public Health, both of which are also located on Mulago Hill. The coordinates of the school are: 00° 20' 17"N, 32° 34' 38"E (Latitude:0.3381, Longitude:32.5772) Makerere University School of Medicine is one of the schools that constitute Makerere University College of Health Sciences, a constituent semi-autonomous college of Makerere University. The schools of the college include: The college is headed by a Principal and a Deputy Principal, while each school is headed by a Dean. As of September 2009, the school departments are: The following undergraduate courses are offered: Degree awarded after two years of pre-clinical instruction and examination by Makerere University School of Biomedical Sciences (Anatomy, Physiology, Biochemistry), and Makerere University School of Health Sciences (Pharmacology), followed by three years of clinical instruction and examination by Makerere University School of Public Health and Makerere University School of Medicine. Degree awarded after three years of instruction and examination in conjunction with Makerere University School of Health Sciences. The following postgraduate courses are offered: A clinical degree awarded following three years of instruction and examination in any of the following specialties: A qualification awarded after a period of instruction, research and examination (typically three to five years}, in clinical disciplines. A recognized masters degree is required prior to admission into the MD program. A qualification awarded after a period of instruction, research and examination (typically three to five years), in clinical disciplines. A recognized masters degree is required prior to admission into the PhD program. 
