 Mastodynia, mastalgia (from the Greek masto-, breast and algos, pain) or mammalgia is the medical symptom of breast pain. Pain can range from minor discomfort to severely incapacitating pain. Many women are more worried about a possible cancer risk than about the pain. Breast pain during lactation or after weaning is not included into this definition but usually classified as breast engorgement or mastitis. It can be classified into 2 main clinical patterns: Cyclical breast pain (cyclical mastalgia) is very often associated with fibrocystic breast changes or duct ectasia and believed to be caused by aberrations in dynamic hormonal changes mainly involving prolactin response to thyrotropin. Some degree of cyclical breast tenderness is normal in the menstrual cycle, and is usually associated with menstruation and/or premenstrual syndrome (PMS). Noncyclical breast pain has various causes and is harder to diagnose. Noncyclical pain has frequently its root cause outside the breast. Some degree of non-cyclical breast tenderness can normally be present due to hormonal changes in puberty (both in girls and boys), in menopause and during pregnancy. After pregnancy, breast pain can be caused by breastfeeding. Other causes of non-cyclical breast pain include alcoholism with liver damage (likely due to abnormal steroid metabolism), mastitis and medications such as digitalis, methyldopa (an antihypertensive), spironolactone, certain diuretics, oxymetholone (an anabolic steroid), and chlorpromazine (a typical antipsychotic). Also, shingles can cause a painful blistering rash on the skin of the breasts. While in many cases it would possible to predict which treatment will be most effective with a series of endocrinological investigations involving thyroid and complicated pituitary hormone testing, this is rarely done in practice. Treatments which demonstrated some effectiveness: Determining the appropriate treatment for noncyclical breast pain is more difficult, not only because it is hard to pinpoint where the pain is coming from, but also because the pain may not have hormonal causes and very often does not respond to hormonal treatment. The great majority of breast cancer cases do not present with symptoms of pain. Some epidemiological investigations suggest that women with symptoms of breast pain may have an increased risk of subsequently developing breast cancer and risk increases with duration of symptoms. This is consistent with the observation that a few special subtypes of fibrocystic breast changes exhibit increased breast cancer risk – see breast cancer risk of fibrocystic breast changes. 
