 Max Pemberton is the pen name of a British medical doctor, journalist and author. He works full-time as a psychiatrist in the National Health Service (NHS). He is a columnist for The Daily Telegraph, writing comment on news events concerning culture, social and ethical issues, the politics of health care and the NHS although his earlier columns focused on his life working as a junior doctor. He also writes a column for Reader’s Digest and has contributed to the Daily Mail, the Daily Mirror and the Evening Standard. His first book, Trust Me I’m A (Junior) Doctor, published by Hodder and Stoughton, recounted his first year working as a doctor in the NHS and was based on his first year of columns for The Daily Telegraph. It was serialised as book of the week on BBC Radio 4. His second book Where Does It Hurt? details his time working in an outreach project for the homeless and people addicted to drugs. He is currently writing a third book to be published by Hodder and Stoughton. After the publication of his first book, the title of his column in The Daily Telegraph changed from Trust Me I'm A (Junior) Doctor to Finger On The Pulse. He is a staunch advocate for the NHS. He is critical of the government’s introduction of PFI in the NHS and opposes the introduction of the NHS patient record database. He has also spoken out against the way the European Working Time Directive has been implemented by NHS trusts and about MTAS and MMC. He often writes about the rights of older people and those with mental illness. He is openly gay and has written against the ban on gay people donating blood in the UK and in support of gay adoption and the impact of homophobic bullying As well as a degree in medicine, he also holds a first class honours degree in Anthropology. His column in the Daily Telegraph won the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Public Education award. He won the Mind Journalist of the Year Award 2010 and the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Public Educator of the Year 2010 award. {{Persondata | NAME =Pemberton, Max | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
