 The Faculty of Medicine is one of the constituent faculties of McGill University. It was established in 1823 as the Montreal Medical Institution, and became the first faculty of McGill College in 1829; it was the first medical faculty to be established in Canada. The Faculty awarded McGill's first degree, and Canada's first medical degree to William Leslie Logie in 1833. The faculty includes three schools, the School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, School of Nursing, and the School of Physical and Occupational Therapy. It also includes several research centres involved in studies on, for example, pain, neuroscience, and aging. Most of the non-clinical parts of the faculty are housed in the [1] McIntyre Medical Sciences Building, situated on McGill's downtown campus on the south side of Mount Royal between Avenue des Pins and Avenue Docteur-Penfield. The McGill University Health Centre is affiliated with the faculty, and is composed of five teaching hospitals — the Royal Victoria Hospital which incorporates the Montreal Chest Institute, Montreal General Hospital, Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal Neurological Hospital. Three other major health care facilities are also affiliated with the faculty: Jewish General Hospital, Douglas Hospital and St. Mary's Hospital. In April 2006, the Quebec government approved plans to commence the first phase of construction of the new, redeveloped McGill University Health Centre (MUHC). McGill University Faculty of Medicine is the only medical school in Canada to award four-year medical M.D., C.M. degrees (abbreviated MDCM). MDCM is from the Latin "Medicinae Doctor et Chirurgiae Magister" meaning "Doctor of Medicine and Master of Surgery". The Faculty of Medicine also offers joint degree programs with other disciplines including business M.D.-M.B.A. and science/engineering M.D.-Ph.D.. There is also an accelerated program for selected graduates of the Quebec junior college (CEGEP) system (PRE-MED-ADM or MED-P) that combines one year of science curriculum with the four-year M.D., C.M. degrees. Admissions to McGill Medicine is very competitive. For medical school students entering in 2010, the mean undergraduate GPA is 3.80, and the mean MCAT score is 32.1 (88th percentile). The Montreal Medical Institution, was established in 1823 by four physicians, two of whom who had been trained at the University of Edinburgh Medical School, and who all worked at the Montreal General Hospital. In 1829 it was incorporated into McGill College as the new College's first faculty; it thus became the first Faculty of Medicine in Canada. A highly didactic approach to medical education called the "Edinburgh curriculum", which consisted of two six-month courses of basic science lectures and two years of "walking the wards" at The Montreal General Hospital, was instituted. Sir William Dawson, the principal of McGill, was instrumental in garnering resources for the faculty and pioneering contributions from Thomas Roddick, Francis Shepherd, George Ross and Sir William Osler helped to transform the Victorian era medical school into a leader in modern medical education. Osler graduated from the MDCM program at McGill University Faculty of Medicine in 1872, and co-founded the present-day Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in 1893. <big>Basic Sciences</big> <big>Clinical </big> <big>Centres </big> Donald Ballew Samuel Ugoji(not sure) 
