 A Meckel's diverticulum, a true congenital diverticulum, is a slight bulge in the small intestine present at birth and a vestigial remnant of the omphalomesenteric duct (also called the vitelline duct or yolk stalk). It is the most common malformation of the gastrointestinal tract is present in approximately 2% of the population, with males more frequently experiencing symptoms. Meckel's diverticulum was first explained by Fabricius Hildanus in the sixteenth century and later named after Johann Friedrich Meckel, who described the embryological origin of this type of diverticulum in 1809. Meckel's diverticulum is located in the distal ileum, usually within 60–100 cm (2 feet) of the ileocecal valve. This blind segment or small pouch is about 3–6 cm long and may have a greater lumen diameter than that of the ileum. It antimesenterically runs and has its own blood supply. It is a remnant of the connection from the yolk-sac to the small intestine present during embryonic development. It is a true diverticulum, consisting of all 3 layers of the bowel wall which are mucosa, submucosa and muscularis propria. As the vitelline duct is made up of pluripotent cell lining, Meckel’s diverticulum may harbor abnormal tissues, containing embryonic remnants of other tissue types. Jejunal, duodenal mucosa or Brunner's tissue were each found in 2% of ectopic cases. Heterotopic rests of gastric mucosa and pancreatic tissue are seen in 60% and 6% of cases respectively. Heterotopic means the displacement of an organ from its normal anatomic location. Inflammation of this Meckel's diverticulum may mimic appendicitis. Therefore during appendectomy, ileum should be checked for the presence of Meckel's diverticulum, if it is found to be present it should be removed along with appendix. A memory aid is the rule of 2s: 2% (of the population).2 feet (proximal to the ileocecal valve).2 inches (in length).2 types of common ectopic tissue (gastric and pancreatic).2 years is the most common age at clinical presentation.2:1 Male:Female ratio. However, the exact value for the above criteria range from 0.2-5 (for example, prevalence is probably 0.2-4%). It can also be present as an indirect hernia, typically on the right side, where it is known as a "Hernia of Littré". A case report of strangulated umbilical hernia with Meckel's diverticulum has also been published in the literature. Furthermore, it can be attached to the umbilical region by the vitelline ligament, with the possibility of vitelline cysts, or even a patent vitelline canal forming a vitelline fistula when the umbilical cord is cut. Torsions of intestine around the intestinal stalk may also occur, leading to obstruction, ischemia, and necrosis. The majority of people afflicted with Meckel's diverticulum are asymptomatic. If symptoms do occur, they typically appear before the age of two. The most common presenting symptom is painless rectal bleeding such as melaena-like black offensive stools, followed by intestinal obstruction, volvulus and intussusception. Occasionally, Meckel's diverticulitis may present with all the features of acute appendicitis. Also, severe pain in the epigastric region is experienced by the patient along with bloating in the epigastric and umbilical regions. At times, the symptoms are so painful that they may cause sleepless nights with acute pain felt in the foregut region, specifically in the epigastric and umbilical regions. In most cases, bleeding occurs without warning and stops spontaneously.The symptoms can be extremely painful, often mistaken as just stomach pain resulting from not eating or constipation. A technetium-99m (99mTc) pertechnetate scan, also called Meckel scan, is the investigation of choice to diagnose Meckel's diverticula in children. This scan detects gastric mucosa; since approximately 50% of symptomatic Meckel's diverticula have ectopic gastric or pancreatic cells contained within them, this is displayed as a spot on the scan distant from the stomach itself. In children, this scan is highly accurate and noninvasive, with 95% specificity and 85% sensitivity; however, in adults the test is only 9% specific and 62% sensitive. Patients with these misplaced gastric cells may experience peptic ulcers as a consequence. Therefore, other tests such as colonoscopy and screenings for bleeding disorders should be performed, and angiography can assist in determining the location and severity of bleeding. Colonoscopy might be helpful to rule out other sources of bleeding but it is not used as an identification tool. Angiography might identify brisk bleeding in patients with Meckel's diverticulum. Ultrasonography could demonstrate omphaloenteric duct remnants or cysts. Computed tomography (CT scan) might be a useful tool to demonstrate a blind ended and inflamed structure in the mid-abdominal cavity, which is not an appendix. In asymptomatic patients, Meckel's diverticulum is often diagnosed as an incidental finding during laparoscopy or laparotomy. Treatment is surgical, potentially with a laparoscopic resection. In patients with bleeding, strangulation of bowel, bowel perforation or bowel obstruction, treatment involves surgical resection of both the Meckel's diverticulum itself along with the adjacent bowel segment, and this procedure is called a "small bowel resection". In patients without any of the aforementioned complications, treatment involves surgical resection of the Meckel's diverticulum only, and this procedure is called a simple diverticulectomy. With regards to asymptomatic Meckel's diverticulum, some recommend that a search for Meckel's diverticulum in every case of appendectomy/ laparotomy done for acute abdomen should be conducted, and if found, Meckel's diverticulectomy or resection should be performed to avoid secondary complications arising from it Meckel's Diverticulum occurs in about 2% of the population. Prevalence in males is 3-5 times higher than in females. Only 2% of cases are symptomatic, which usually presents among children at the age of 2. Most cases of Meckel's diverticulum are diagnosed when complications manifest or incidentally in unrelated conditions such as laparotomy, laparoscopy or contrast study of the small intestine. Classic presentation in adults includes intestinal obstruction and inflammation of the diverticulum (diverticulitis). Painless rectal bleeding most commonly occurs in toddler. Inflammation in the ileal diverticulum has symptoms that mimic appendicitis, therefore its diagnosis is of clinical importance. Detailed knowledge of the pathophysiological properties is essential in dealing with the life threatening complications of Meckel's diverticulum. mnemonic The omphalomesenteric duct (omphaloenteric duct, vitelline duct or yolk stalk) normally connects the embryonic midgut to the yolk sac ventrally, providing nutrients to the midgut during embryonic development. The vitelline duct narrows progressively and disappears between the 5<sup>th</sup> and 8<sup>th</sup> weeks gestation. In Meckel’s diverticulum, the proximal part of vitelline duct fails to regress and involute, which remains as a remnant of variable length and location. The solitary diverticulum lies on the antimesenteric border of the ileum (opposite to the mesenteric attachment) and extends into the umbilical cord of the embryo. The left and right vitelline arteries originate from the primitive dorsal aorta, and travel with the omphaloenteric duct. The right becomes the superior mesenteric artery that supplies a terminal branch to the diverticulum, while the left involutes. Having its own blood supply, Meckel’s diverticulum is susceptible to obstruction or infection. The lifetime risk for a person with Meckel's diverticulum to develop certain complications is about 4-6%. Gastrointestinal bleeding, peritonitis or intestinal obstruction may occur in 15-30% of symptomatic patients (Table 1). Only 6.4% of all complications requires surgical treatment; and untreated Meckel’s diverticulum has a mortality rate of 2.5-15%. <caption>Table 1 - Complications of Meckel’s Diverticulum.:</caption> Complications Percentage of symptomatic Meckel’s Diverticulum (%) Haemorrhage 20-30 Intestinal obstruction 20-25 Diverticulitis 10-20 Umbilical anomalies ≤10 Neoplasm 0.5-2 Bleeding of the diverticulum is most common in young children, especially in males who are less than 2 years of age. Symptoms may include bright red blood in stools (hematochezia), weakness, abdominal tenderness or pain, and even anaemia in some cases. Haemorrhage may be caused by: The appearance of stools may indicate the nature of the haemorrhage: Inflammation of the diverticulum can mimic symptoms of appendicitis i.e. periumbilical tenderness and intermittent crampy abdominal pain. Perforation of the inflamed diverticulum can result in peritonitis. Diverticulitis can also cause adhesions, leading to intestinal obstruction. Diverticulitis may result from: Symptoms: Vomiting, abdominal pain and severe or complete constipation. Anomalies between the diverticulum and umbilicus may include the presence of fibrous cord, cyst, fistula or sinus, leading to: Tumors in Meckel's diverticulum may cause bleeding, acute abdominal pain, gastrointestinal obstruction, perforation or intussusception. Major League Baseball player Chan Ho Park, then a pitcher with the San Diego Padres (currently with the Pittsburgh Pirates), suffered multiple episodes during the 2006 season in which mysterious internal bleeding caused him to lose a significant fraction of his blood volume. He was finally diagnosed with Meckel's diverticulum, which was surgically removed August 23, 2006.Nirvana lead-singer Kurt Cobain is thought to have suffered from it as well as Samuel Cooper, Laura Cisneros and George Washington. 
