 Medical Council of Canada (MCC) (French: Le Conseil médical du Canada) is an organization that is charged with assessing medical candidates, evaluation of physicians through exams and granting a qualification called Licentiate of the Medical Council of Canada (LMCC) to those who wish to practice medicine in Canada. MCC is governed by a 51-member Executive Board of Council, who meets once a year to discuss budgets, policies and assets. The day-to-day operation is carried out by the Executive Director, currently Dr. M. Ian Bowmer. Founded by the Canada Medical Act in 1912 through the effort of Sir Thomas Roddick, a physician and Member of Parliament, who have been pursuing a standardized licensing scheme in Canada for over 18 years. Beginning April 1912, MCC gave the right to practice throughout Canada, to be admitted to the British Medical Register (BMR) to serve in the medical forces of the army and navy. The practice for registering physicians into the BMR eventually ceased but those who wish to practice in the UK can register themselves with the General Medical Council. Exam Candidates Assessment areas Costs Medical Council of Canada Evaluating Examination (MCCEE) "international medical graduates, international medical students in their final clinical year and U.S. osteopathic physicians" who wish to take the MCCQE Part I & II and further pursue LMCC in Canada. $1,645 CDN Qualifying Examination Part I (QE Part I) Canadian medical graduates and those who passed MCCEE $920 CDN Qualifying Examination Part II (QE Part II) Candidates who passed QE Part I $2,190 CDN A pass standing is required on both the QE Part I and the QE Part II in order to be awarded Licentiate of the Medical Council of Canada. LMCC is recognized by the 12 medical licensing authorities in Canada, and is one of the requirements for the issuance of a license to practice medicine in Canada. Licentiate of the Medical Council of Canada, commonly abbreviated as LMCC, is a physician that, according to the bylaws of MCC: MCC also maintains the Canadian Medical Register, a list of physicians who have completed or exempted from the LMCC requirement. This is the first step for medical graduates who wish to obtain license to practice prior to applying to their own regulatory body in their home province or territory. 
