 Medical privacy or health privacy is the practice of keeping information about a patient confidential. This involves both conversational discretion on the part of health care providers, and the security of medical records. The terms can also refer to the physical privacy of patients from other patients and providers while in a medical facility. Modern concerns include the degree of disclosure to insurance companies, employers, and other third parties. The advent of electronic medical records has raised new concerns about privacy, balanced with efforts to reduce duplication of services and medical errors. In the course of having or being part of a medical practice, doctors may learn information they wish to share with the medical or research community. If this information is shared or published, the privacy of the patients must be respected. Likewise, participants in medical research that are outside the realm of direct patient care have a right to privacy as well. On 1 July 2012 the Australian Government launched the Personally Controlled Electronic Health Record (PCEHR). The system is an ‘opt in’ one, whereby people choose whether to register for the eHealth record. The Personally Controlled Electronic Health Records Act 2012 and the Privacy Act 1988 govern how information will be managed and protected. A comprehensive Privacy Statement includes explanation of the types of personal information collected, what the information is used for and how the information is stored. By 1999, 62% of the National Health Service (NHS) trusts used electronic records to some degree. In 2003, the NHS made moves to create a centralized electronic registry of medical records. The system is protected by the UK's Government Gateway, which was built by Microsoft. This program is known as Electronic Records Development and Implementation Programme (ERDIP). The NHS National Program for IT has been criticized for its lack of security and lack of patient privacy. It was one of the projects that caused the Information Commissioner, to warn that there was a danger of the country "sleepwalking" into a surveillance society. Pressure groups opposed to ID cards are also campaigning against the centralized registry. Privacy is based on patients' rights in the UK flowing from the European Convention of Human Rights, through to the Data Protection Act (DPA). The opposing point of view that access should be on a 'need to know basis' is not legal, it is the patient who must grant access. The most recent development in the USA is the Medical Information Privacy and Security Act (MIPSA). It contains important provisions requiring the generation of an audit trail of information being accessed, and allows patients the ability to partition their data so that, for example, genetic information is not revealed when they go for a flu shot. Individuals have a right to access, copy, edit and augment their information. Privacy advocates in the United States have raised concerns about the switch from paper to electronic medical records. Some commentators fear this will lead to unauthorized access to personal data. In New Zealand, the Health Information Privacy Code (1994), sets specific rules for agencies in the health sector to better ensure the protection of individual privacy. The code addresses the health information collected, used, held and disclosed by health agencies. For the health sector, the code takes the place of the information privacy principles. The introduction of a nationwide system for the exchange of medical information and access to electronic patient records, led to much discussion in the Netherlands. 
