 Microneurography is a technique used in the field of neuroscience to measure post-ganglionic sympathetic neural activity of the muscle and skin. One aspect of this technique that makes it especially useful is that it can be performed in vivo in human subjects who are awake. A microelectrode is inserted through the skin and into the nerve fiber to be studied. Recordings of muscle sympathetic neuronal activity (MSNA) and skin sympathetic neuronal activity (SSNA) have shown the presence of several classes of sensory receptors, including those to pain and temperature. The effects of gravity and pressure on the sympathetic nervous system have also been studied using microneurography; one experiment was even performed in space by astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. In addition to providing an ability to study the human sympathetic nervous system in vivo, microneurography has the benefit of being minimally invasive and very locally specific since it is able to distinguish between action potentials from individual fibers. The first successful recording of neural impulses from human peripheral nerves was by Hensel and Boman in 1960. They used a glass microelectrode to record single unit afferent discharges from peripheral nerves of human subjects. In 1967, two different Swedish groups independently reported a much less invasive recording techniques of human neural discharges. Both groups used metal microelectrodes that punctured the skin without anesthesia into the peripheral nerves in healthy human subjects. Knutsson and Widén used a platinum–iridium microelectrode, while Hagbarth and Vallbo introduced the method of human percutaneous microneurography with solid tungsten electrodes. The method used by Hagbarth and Vallbo has become widely used, and is currently called microneurography.<ref name= "Mano"> Generally during microneurography, 100-200 μm diameter tungsten microelectrodes possessing an epoxy resin insulated shaft are used. These electrodes enable recording of both single-unit discharge of myelinated and unmyelinated fibers and synchronized volleys of discharges. Initially, the skin and ultrasound probe are subject to an aseptic technique, which involves cleaning them both with chlorhexidine and/or alcohol solution. Sterile microelectrodes and ultrasound gel are also used. In order to image the nerve during microelectrode placement, a linear, high frequency probe is used that is generally set to 2-3 cm. Because this technique is generally focused on measuring MSNA at the peroneal nerve near the fibular head, the probe is placed posterior to the tibial tuberosity on the fibula. However, similar techniques can be used for other nerve placements within the body. The microelectrode is then inserted 1-2 cm posterior to the probe in such a way that it is as close to a 90° angle to the ultrasound beam as possible. This generates the best wave reflection and image production for the procedure to be carried out as accurately as possible.Use of ultrasound reduces the time necessary to place the microelectrode into the nerve down to a few minutes. Small adjustments may still be necessary to obtain a satisfactory signal for microneurographical recording. The ultrasound machine is then turned off in order to minimize noise interference during recording.<ref name= "curry"> Ultrasound accurately locates the depth of the nerve to guide placement of the microelectrode. In addition, identification of surrounding anatomical structures is possible, such as vascular structures and bones, which may affect the placement of a microelectrode. Also, ultrasound guidance allows a visualization of the electrode and the nerve at the same time and the microelectrode can be placed into the nerve under concurrent ultrasound guidance. However, using ultrasound does not guarantee that an adequate signal can be obtained. For example, a microelectrode can enter or pass through nerves without hearing the characteristic discharge. In addition, the type of nerve fiber that the tip of the microelectrode is in contact with cannot be determined with ultrasound. Ultrasound is also not of help in avoiding skin SNA or “mixed” skin and muscle signals, though it does help with quick repositioning of the microelectrode. The technique of microneurography has been used in laboratory settings and in [[Microneurography#Clinical Trials Using Microneurography|clinical trials]] to study [[autonomic nervous system]] function. Microneurography was originally used to investigate afferent discharges in myelinated fibers from the muscles and skin More current research is examining the action potentials in afferent and efferent C-fibers, unmyelinated peripheral axons. Experiments performed using microneurography have elucidated details of muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA), skin sympathetic nerve activity (SSNA), the action of several classes of [[Group C nerve fiber|C-fibers]] including nociceptors (pain receptors), as well as pruritus (itching), abnormal blood pressure control, and thermoregulation. C-fibers often function as sensory receptors. Based on the different characteristics of sensory endings and axonal properties gathered from microneurography studies, C-fibers can be separated into different functional groups including C-cold, C-polymodal, and C-mechano-insensitive. It was traditionally thought that afferent C-fibers were limited to pain and warmth detection. However, it has been shown that human C-fibers can be activated and fire at high frequencies from small stimuli such as lightly stroking the skin. This class of receptor is hypothesized to have a role in grooming behavior. Touch evoked activation of the insular cortex but not the primary or secondary somatosensory cortex in patients without myelinated fibers further supports that these C-fibers have a role in emotional touch, hence, is associated with the limbic system. Impaired function of these fibers may affect a patient’s social life considerably.Thermoreceptors can be separated into two groups for warmth and cold detection. C-fibers are responsible for warmth detection; these are mechano-insensitive, low in number, innervate a small receptor field. Consequently, there is low innervation for warmth detection. Aδ fibers are responsible for cold detection but there are few examples of microneurography recordings from Aδ fibers in humans. It has been shown that when these A-fibers are differentially blocked, mild cooling can result in a sensation of heat. This suggest that there is a subset of C-fibers that function as cold-receptors to a lesser degree when A-fibers are also active. In the absence of A-fiber input, these C-cold fibers produce a sensation of heat. Recordings of these C-fibers have been made with microneurography. The activation threshold was shown to be about twenty nine degrees and activity-dependent hyperpolarization of axons (which leads to slower conduction velocities) was much less pronounced in C-cold fibers compared to nociceptors. SSNA, rather than MSNA, plays an important role in thermoregulation.<ref name= "manosympathetic"> Unmyelinated pain receptors known as nociceptors comprise the most numerous classes of somatic afferent nerve fibers. The majority of these are polymodal nociceptors which are activated by mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli. The activation of these receptors for heat corresponds to the heat pain threshold for humans. Unmyelinated nociceptor fibers that are not activated by mechanical stimulation are said to be mechano-insensitive. These fibers have been shown to differ from polymodal fibers in several ways including higher activation threshold for heat, larger innervation territories in the leg, slower conduction velocity, and greater activity dependent hyperpolarization.Mechano-insensitive nociceptors may become sensitized in several ways, sometimes resulting in chronic pain. Inflammatory mediators applied to receptors on “sleeping” mechano-insensitive fibers were found to sensitize the fibers and render them mechano-responsive. This finding may describe the increased sensitivity that results from an injury. It is suspected that the inflammatory mediators bind protein receptors on mechano-insensitive nociceptors but sensitization of these C-fibers may also be caused by changes in gene expression that affect expression of transduction proteins. In either case, the sensitization of mechano-insensitive nociceptors has been observed to result in hyperalgesia, chronic pain. High electrical activation threshold observed in C-mechano-insensitive fibers was used to investigate their role in neurogenic vasodilation. Human neurogenic vasodilation was found to differ from rodent neurogenic vasodilation in that it can only be elicited by stimulation of C-mechano-insensitive fibers and not by polymodal nociceptors. Microneurography has also been used to investigate the sensation of itch, otherwise known as pruritus. About ten percent of mechano-insensitive nociceptors are activated by histamine. These activated histamine-positive fibers correspond to the itch sensation in humans and are consequently termed “itch specific” fibers. Microneurography recordings from afferent muscle mechanoreceptors have been used to better understand the mechanisms of motor control. Afferent muscle spindle recordings are particularly useful to understanding fine, precise movements and may be used to predict behavior outcomes during the learning of a motor task. In 1998, the technique was performed for the first time on a spaceflight to explore the effect that microgravity has on the human sympathetic nerve system. Three American and two Japanese astronauts mastered and performed the technique aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia. Two aboard the shuttle successfully measured MSNA from the peroneal nerves of fellow astronauts. This study revealed that MSNA was enhanced during the twelfth and thirteenth days of spaceflight and just after returning to Earth. MSNA was earlier found to be enhanced by gravitational stress and suppressed by simulated weightlessness through a baroreflex mechanism to maintain hemodynamic homeostasis. Therefore, the experiment in space further supports the original findings that weightlessness results in a decrease in MSNA activity. MSNA was also enhanced by simulated high altitude through a chemoreflex mechanism. Microneurography has been able to show that an individual’s level of MNSA is dependent on the age of the that individual. In other words, age is an important factor in influencing neural traffic. Sundlof and Wallin (1978), when recording from the peroneal nerve, there was a weak positive correlation between the age of the subject and the MSNA burst incidence per 100 heartbeats. Iwase et. al., (1991, 1992) also showed that the basal level of MSNA bursts recorded from the tibial nerve also increased with age in subjects ranging from eighteen to seventy six years of age. A study by Matsukawa et al., (1989) suggested that the increase in MSNA in older subjects may be due to baroreflex control, while a study by Jones et al., (1997) suggested increase is due to higher body fat, particularly in the abdominal region, and a further study by Sverrisdottiir et al., (2001) suggested that decreased serum levels of growth factor-I were the cause. The pressor response to MSNA, increase in heart rate with corresponding decrease in stroke volume, was shown to be delayed or diminished in the elderly, which indicates that blood pressure response is also lowered in the elderly. Higher MSNA activity may be compensating for lowered pressor responses or age-related changes in blood vessels or alpha adrenergic receptors that maintain blood pressure. Microneurography records intact axons in vivo and is minimally invasive. Reports of persistent or clear nerve damage due to microneurography have not been made. As a result, repeated recordings on the same living subject are possible and longitudinal observations can be made. Microneurography can be time-consuming and difficult because it requires an expert investigator and a patient who is willing to collaborate. Consequently, microneurography has been used on few occasions to study neuropathic pain patients.Though there are minor, short lasting, or no side effects at all after microneurography that have been reported, some axonal damage does occur where the needle is placed, causing de- and regeneration of nerve fibers. 
