 Mosaraf Ali (born 1953 in Calcutta, India) is a physician trained in both Western and Indian medicine and a leading proponent of integrated medicine (the mixing of conventional medicine and alternative medicine). He is the author of a number of books including: The Neck Connection, Dr Ali's Women's Health Bible, Dr Ali's Weight Loss Programme, The Integrated Health Bible, Therapeutic Yoga, Dr Ali's Ultimate Back Book and Dr Ali's Nutrition Bible. He is also the author of a chapter in a book entitled The Future of the NHS (2006) (ISBN 1-85811-369-5). Ali also wrote a column on "integrated medicine" for UK's Mail on Sunday for five years. Ali specializes in Integrated Medicine and Health Screening, Integrated Physical Therapy, Ayurveda, Unani Medicine and Marma Therapy. In 2011 he was featured on The Dr. Oz Show. His appearance was so popular, it was re-aired twice, and he’s been invited back in 2012. He has also been featured in Vogue, The New Sun, Italian Vanity Fair and various television and radio shows around the world. Mosaraf Ali grew up in Asansol, the second largest city in West Bengal as well as in Howrah. He trained as a doctor at the University of Delhi and then the Central Institute for Advanced Medical Studies in Moscow from 1973 to 1982 where he studied iridology, tongue diagnosis, pulse diagnosis, fasting therapy and naturopathy. After a stint in rural India studying homeopathy, herbalism and medical fasting, and working in Hong Kong at the Vital Life Centre from 1988 until May 1991, he came to London to work at the Hale Clinic where his therapies reportedly proved successful for patients such as Sarah Miles and Ava Gardner. Following this he worked towards establishing a clinic where both complementary and conventional treatment would be offered with the help in particular of Prince Charles who also wrote the foreword to his 2001 book The Integrated Health Bible. In 1998 he opened the Integrated Medical Centre in London with a team of fifteen doctors and therapists. Ali also operates a charity clinic in the village of Sagoor in Kangra valley. Dr. Ali has done research in stroke rehabilitation using his own technique in two leading UK medical institutions. He trained four batches of NHS doctors in his unique diagnostic and therapeutic integrated medical techniques. {{Persondata | NAME =Ali, Mosaraf | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 1953 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
