 Mucosal lichen planus, or oral lichen planus (OLP), is lichen planus (an inflammatory auto-immune disease) that affects oral mucosa, with or without the involvement of the skin and other mucous membranes. OLP affects women more than men (at a ratio of 3:2), and occurs most often in middle-aged adults. OLP in children is rare. The cause of lichen planus is not known. It is not contagious and does not involve any known pathogen.OLP has been reported as a complication of chronic hepatitis C virus infection and can be a sign of chronic graft-versus-host disease of the mucous membrane (and skin).It has been suggested that OLP may respond to stress, where lesions may present on the mucosa (or skin) during times of stress in those with the disease. OLP may present in one of three forms. Lichen planus may also affect the genital mucosa - vulvovaginal-gingival lichen planus. It can resemble other skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. Rarely, lichen planus shows esophageal involvement, where it can present with erosive esophagitis and stricturing. It has also been hypothesized that it is a precursor to squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. The microscopic appearance of lichen planus is pathognomonic for the condition The clinical presentation of OLP may also resemble other conditions, including: A biopsy is useful in identifying histological features that help differentiate OLP from these conditions, except of the histologically identical lichenoid reaction lesion (including lichenoid reaction of graft-versus-host disease). Frictional keratosis and morsicatio buccarum can and should be diagnosed clinically without histo-pathlogical examination. Care of OLP is within the scope of Oral medicine speciality. It is generally accepted that OLP (as well as other mucous membrane lichen planus, such as genital) is more difficult to manage than skin lichen planus. Currently there is no cure for lichen planus but there are certain types of medicines used to reduce the effects of the inflammation. Lichen planus may go into a dormant state after treatment. There are also reports that lichen planus can flare up years after it is considered cured. Medicines used to treat lichen planus include: Non-drug treatments: 
