 Mumps outbreaks in the 2000s refers to mumps outbreaks occurring from 2000 through 2009. Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia. Dalhousie University was struck with an outbreak of the mumps confirmed in many students with suspected cases in dozens of others. The main causes of the large outbreak include students being unaware of being infected, and other students who knowingly ignored quarantine restrictions. The outbreak began after St. Patrick's Day, and has spread beyond the university community, with confirmed cases reaching 350 cases of mumps since February, including about 24 new cases that have surfaced during the week ending June 9, 2007. The end of the university year in May meant that many students travelled to their homes across the country carrying the infection, leading to a large scale spread, the extent of which is still not clear, although the prevalence of the disease lay in people aged 17 to 24. Roughly 50 personnel of the Halifax-based navy ship HMCS Glace Bay were sent home as a precaution. Reported outbreaks have begun in New Brunswick (Approximately 100 cases), Prince Edward Island (2 cases), Ontario (3 cases confirmed, 5 suspected), West Coast of Newfoundland (2 cases), and Toronto (3 cases). On October 3, 2007, a new case was reported at Nipissing University/Canadore College, in North Bay, Ontario. On October 26, four additional cases were reported in Alberta at the University of Lethbridge and Lethbridge College; By October 30, this had expanded to 5 confirmed. As of Nov. 16 there have been a total of 54 cases in Alberta. As of Nov. 29 there have been 57 confirmed cases in Calgary Alberta, six at the University of Calgary as well as outbreaks at SAIT Polytechnic and Mount Royal College. A vaccination program is currently being undertaken to re-immunize all students in post-secondary by the Calgary Health Region. Vaccinations are also occurring at universities in Edmonton. As of December 11, 2007 the Alberta government has suspended its inoculation program after several people suffered severe allergic reactions. In late August, 2008, a mumps outbreak was reported in Agassiz, spreading westward into Vancouver. In September 2008, a single confirmed case of the mumps occurred in London, Ontario. The individual was a student of Fanshawe College. In June 2010, a single confirmed case of the mumps occurred in Vancouver, BC. In March 2011, a few cases of mumps in Whistler, BC. In the United Kingdom, between the years of 2004–2006, a mumps outbreak has involved more than 70,000 patients.[1] The cause of the outbreak is low immunity in those too old to have received MMR, but young enough to have not developed natural immunity through exposure. A catch-up programme of immunisation of under twenty-five-year-olds, particularly in university towns such as Exeter was implemented. Although there may not be a direct link with the mumps outbreak in Ireland, United States CDC Director Dr. Julie Gerberding has been quoted stating that the genotype from the U.S. outbreak, "in the early cases of this outbreak, was the same genotype of virus that was associated with the United Kingdom outbreak." Entrez Gene contains a placeholder database record for a new Mumps gene; the record is dated 23 February 2006. In early 2006, for reasons still not fully understood, the state of Iowa experienced a large surge in the number of reported mumps infections. [2] According to the New York Times, college students accounted for about a quarter of the 245 cases [3], while about half of the cases are people aged seventeen to twenty five.Doctors are attributing the rise in mumps case frequency to low vaccination rates in Iowa's youth, coupled with the close quarters in dormitories, classrooms and cafeterias. According to Canadian media reports, there may be something novel about this mumps strain which indicates a standard MMR-series vaccination is not 95% effective, as was thought. There have been three confirmed cases of the mumps at Southern Illinois University-Carbondale, Two cases at Loyola University Chicago, and has spread to three other neighboring counties in the Southern Illinois area. There has also been one confirmed case at Knox College, in Galesburg (Western Illinois). Wheaton College has also been affected by 93 cases since early September (as of Jan 9). In May 2004, an 8-year-old in Orange County is diagnosed with the mumps. 
