 The myeloproliferative diseases (MPDs) or myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are a group of diseases of the bone marrow in which excess cells are produced. They are related to, and may evolve into, myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia, although the myeloproliferative diseases on the whole have a much better prognosis than these conditions. The concept of myeloproliferative disease was first proposed in 1951 by the eminent hematologist William Dameshek. In the most recent World Health Organization classification of Hematologic malignancies, this group of diseases was renamed from "myeloproliferative diseases" to "myeloproliferative neoplasms". This reflects the underlying clonal genetic changes that are a salient feature of this group of disease. Although not a malignant neoplasm like other cancers, MPDs are classified within the hematological neoplasms. There are four main myeloproliferative diseases, which can be further categorized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome: Philadelphia Chromosome "positive" Philadelphia Chromosome "negative" In 2001, the World Health Organization classified "chronic eosinophilic leukemia / hypereosinophilic syndrome" and chronic neutrophilic leukemia under "Chronic myeloproliferative diseases". All MPDs arise from precursors of the myeloid lineage in the bone marrow. The lymphoid lineage may produce similar diseases, the lymphoproliferative disorders (acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma). Most cases have an activating JAK2 or MPL mutation. A smaller subset also have mutations in the genes LNK, CBL, TET2, ASXL1, IDH, IKZF1 or EZH2. The pathogenetic contribution of these mutations is being studied. 96% of patients with polycythemia vera have a V617F mutation in exon 14 of JAK2. Depending on the nature of the myeloproliferative disorder, diagnostic tests may include red cell mass determination (for polycythemia), bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy, arterial oxygen saturation and carboxyhaemoglobin level, neutrophil alkaline phosphatase level, vitamin B<sub>12</sub> (or B<sub>12</sub> binding capacity) and serum urate. According to the WHO Classification of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Neoplasms 2008 myeloproliferative disorders are divided into the following by diagnostic characteristics: with defining translocation t(9;22) BCR-ABL translocation which has three breakpoints: a. u-BCR-ABL (p230): leads to CML with usual neutrophilia and basophiliab. minor-BCR-ABL (p190): leads to CML which has a tendency to become acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) usually precursor B ALL and rarely precursor T ALLc. major-BCR-ABL (p210): normal usual breakpoint associated with JAK2 mutation in up to 50% of cases and MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 5% of cases:a. Cellular phase - increased megakaryocytes which cluster, reticulin fibrosis, later trichrome (collagenous) fibrosis, and increased myeloid precursorsb. Fibrotic phase - collagenous fibrosis with lack of marrow elements associated most often with JAK2 mutation in up to 80% of cases:a. Cellular phase - increased megakaryocytes which cluster, reticulin fibrosis, later trichrome fibrosis, and increased myeloid and erythroid precursorsb. Fibrotic phase - collagenous fibrosis with lack of marrow elements associated with JAK2 mutation in up to 20% of cases and MPL (thrombopoietin receptor) mutation in up to 15% of cases:a. Cellular phase - increased large megakaryocytes with fibrosis and little increase in other bone marrow elementsb. Fibrotic phase - collagenous fibrosis with lack of marrow elements These disorders are still being revised according to more specific genetic mutations and how often patients end in a fibrotic marrow event. In 2005, the discovery of the JAK2 V617F mutation provided some evidence to suggest a common pathogenesis for the Philadelphia Chromosome negative MPDs. While investigational drug therapies exist, there is currently not a curative drug treatment for MPDs. The goal of treatment for ET and PV is to prevent thrombohemorragic complications. The goal of treatment for MF is to alleviate anemia, splenomegaly, and other symptoms. Low-dose aspirin is effective in PV and ET. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors have improved the prognosis of CML patients. Recently a JAK2 inhibitor has been approved for use in primary myelofibrosis. Trials of these inhibitors are in progress for the treatment of the other myeloproliferative disorders. 
