 Myositis ossificans comprises two syndromes characterized by heterotopic ossification (calcification) of muscle. The condition may sometimes be diagnosed from radiographs obtained for unrelated problems. Most (i.e. 80%) ossifications arise in the thigh or arm, and are caused by a premature return to activity after an injury. Other sites include intercostal spaces, erector spinae, pectoralis muscles, glutei, and the chest. Hazy densities are sometimes noted approximately one month after injury, while the denser opacities eventually seen may not be apparent until two months have passed. If the ossification is located in the adductor muscles, it is known as "Prussian's disease". The specific cause and pathophysiology are unclear - it may be caused by an interaction between local factors (e.g., a reserve of available calcium in adjacent skeletal tissue or soft tissue edema, vascular stasis tissue hypoxia or mesenchymal cells with osteoblastic activity) and unknown systemic factors. The basic mechanism is the inappropriate differentiation of fibroblasts into bone-forming cells (osteoblasts). Early edema of connective tissue proceeds to tissue with foci of calcification and then to maturation of calcification and osifications Radiation therapy subsequent to the injury or as a preventive measure of recurrence may be applied but its usefulness is inconclusive. Treatment is initially conservative, as some patients' calcifications will spontaneously be reabsorbed, and others will have minimal symptoms. In occasional cases, surgical debridement of the abnormal tissue is required, although success of such therapy is limited. Treatment of myositis ossificans: Surgical removal of the myositis ossificans is rarely warranted. If the myositis ossificans is excised before its maturation, it will likely reoccur. Consequently, most healthcare providers wait 6–12 months before considering excision. There is a chance of relapse even when removed in a mature state. In general, myositis ossificans is removed surgically if it limits the range of motion of the joint, irritates a nerve or lowers quality of life. 
