 Myxedema is a form of hypothyroidism developing in the older child or adult. The clinical manifestations vary with the age of the onset of the deficiency. Clinical features of myxedema are characterized by a slowing of physical and mental activity. The initial symptoms include generalized fatigue, apathy, and mental sluggishness. Speech and intellectual functions become slowed. Patients with myxedema are unenthusiastic, cold intolerant, and frequently overweight. Decreased gastrointestinal motility results in constipation, and decreased sympathetic activity reduces sweating. The skin of these patients is often cool and pale. The patients often complain about shortness of breath and decreased exercise capacity. In addition, hypothyroidism promotes atherogenic profile, and serum levels of total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) are increased. Patients with unexplained increase in body weight or hypercholesterolemia should be assessed for potential hypothyroidism. Measurement of serum TSH level is the most sensitive screening test for this disorder.Myxedema (BrE: myxoedema) describes a specific form of cutaneous and dermal edema secondary to increased deposition of connective tissue components (like glycosaminoglycans, hyaluronic acid, and other mucopolysaccharides) in subcutaneous tissue as seen in various forms of hypothyroidism and Graves' disease (pretibial myxedema). It is more common in women than in men. The word originates from taken from ancient Greek to convey 'mucus' or 'slimy substance' and for swelling. Symptoms of Myxedema include thickening of the skin, and other symptoms associated with hypothyroidism, including fatigue, weight gain, depression, dry skin, and brittle hair, among others. The warning signs of myxedema include an intolerance to cold, low blood pressure, shortness of breath, lethargy and seizures. Someone suffering from untreated myxedema can become comatose and die.Nonpitting edema of the lower extremities is sometimes present. The findings from a thyroid examination are usually normal, but a goiter may be present in some patients. The presence of a scar on the neck might suggest postsurgical hypothyroidism and may be an important clue in the diagnosis of a patient who is comatose. A neurologic examination may reveal decreased reflex tendon relaxation and will invariably reveal altered mentation. Hard stools or constipation Increased sensitivity to cold Fatigue or feeling slowed down Heavier menstrual periods Joint or muscle pain Paleness or dry skin Sadness or depression Thin, brittle hair or fingernails Weakness Weight gain without trying Weight gain Slow speech Pale skin Swelling of leg (edema) Muscular cramps Shortness of breath Absence of sweat Secretion of milk from breast Loss of hearing sensations Reduced taste sensations Lowered sense of smell Absence of menstrual periods Rise in menstrual bleeding Thyroxine administration. The increased deposition of glycosaminoglycan is not fully understood, however two mechanisms predominate. The increased deposition of glycosaminoglycans causes an osmotic edema and fluid collection. Hashimoto's thyroiditis, an autoimmune condition, is the most common cause of myxedema in the United States. 
