 The National Childbirth Trust (NCT) is a UK-based charity with registered charity number 801395. The National Childbirth Trust is the leading charity offering information and support in pregnancy, childbirth and early parenthood. The National Childbirth Trust, originally called The Natural Childbirth Trust, was founded in 1955 as the result of an advertisement placed in The Times by Prunella Briance. Briance was inspired by the writings of British obstetrician Grantly Dick-Read, who is regarded by many as the father of natural childbirth, and became the first president of the NCT. At that time the rules of childbirth dictated that women did as their doctors told them. Very little information about pregnancy and birth was available. The resulting ignorance bred fear, and fear led to pain and a lack of support in childbirth and early parenthood. Briance's advertisement announced "A Natural Childbirth Association is to be formed for the promotion and better understanding of the Dick-Read system. Anyone interested write Box...". The inaugural meeting was held on January 29, 1957 at Caxton Hall with Grantly Dick-Read as one of the speakers. The NCA became the Natural Childbirth Trust in 1958. The Trust's activities include parentcraft classes (ante-natal and in some areas post-natal), breastfeeding advice and organising nearly new sales. Local branches pursue a wide variety of projects on a volunteer basis, from publishing newsletters with local content for parents, to running major fundraising events such as sponsored toddles and charity balls. A quarterly magazine, NewGen, published by Axon Publishing, communicates its activities to all members. NCT runs courses for parents-to-be and new parents all over the UK and the Channel Islands. These courses are facilitated by diploma-trained professionals, and focus on providing evidence-based information about pregnancy, birth, and early parenthood. Class groups are kept intentionally small - both to promote interactivity and to allow parents to develop a social support network. Courses are open to all, including disabled parents, surrogate parents, single-sex couples, single parents, adoptive parents, and indeed anyone with or expecting a new baby. The charity offers concessions to those on low incomes, and has also provided courses to parents who cannot join in normal classes, for example mothers in prison. NCT offers the following types of course: In some areas, NCT can offer workshops on specialised topics such as homebirth and weaning. In April 2012, NCT launched NCT helpline, a single number which allows parents and parents-to-be to access information on pregnancy, feeding and all their course information. NCT helpline is 0300 330 0700. Nearly New Sales (NNS) help raise funds for the charity and mean that parents have somewhere to buy inexpensive but decent equipment, toys and clothes. NNS also enable parents to pass on their children's toys and clothes to good homes. The (NNS) sales are organised by local NCT branches. Bumps and Babies groups organised by the charity bring together mothers with babies of a similar age for support and socialising. A chance to have a cup of tea and talk to other mums in your area, and encourage your child/children to play. These events are for those in early pregnancy and their partners. Like speed dating parents get a chance to meet others who live nearby and are expecting a baby. The NCT campaigns on issues such as improving services for those expecting a baby, providing support for parents who want their baby to be breastfed, and for issues affecting those caring for a child under 2 years old. The NCT is also a supporter of the Nestlé boycott. The National Childbirth Trust's trading arm raises funds for the charity through its online shop, www.nctsales.co.uk, offering a wide selection of products and information for pregnancy, birth and early parenthood, including an extensive range of nursing bras and homeopathic remedies. All profits go to the charity to support its work. 
