 The National Women's Health Network (NWHN) is a non-profit women's health advocacy organization located in Washington, D.C.. It was founded in 1975 by Barbara Seaman, Alice Wolfson, Belita Cowan, Mary Howell, M.D., and Phyllis Chesler, Ph.D. The stated mission of the organization is to give women a greater voice within the healthcare system. NWHN is financially supported by 8,000 members, and does not accept contributions from the tobacco and medical industries. The NWHN researches and lobbies federal agencies on such issues as AIDS, reproductive rights, breast cancer, older women’s health, and new contraceptive technologies. The Women's Health Voice, the NWHN's health information program, provides independent research on a variety of women's health topics. Access to their services, as well as various fact sheets, position papers, outside resources, and their newsletters can be found on their official site The NWHN was founded in 1975 by Barbara Seaman, Alice Wolfson, Belita Cowan, Mary Howell, M.D., and Phyllis Chesler, Ph.D. as a lobby group for women's health advocacy. It quickly expanded to become a clearinghouse for women's health information as well, and continues to provide women with objective health information from a feminist viewpoint. In its first year, the NWHN organized the first ever protest against the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In 1975, organizers opposed to the FDA approval and lack of oversight of synthetic estrogens such as DES and high-dose estrogens in combined oral contraceptive pills carried signs reading "Feed Estrogen to the Rats at the FDA" and "Women's Health, Not Drug Company Wealth." After the protests and the Nelson Pill Hearings, Patient Packaging Inserts (PPIs) listing side effects were instated for oral contraceptives—the first PPIs in U.S. history. [2] The National Women’s Health Network helped found Raising Women’s Voices, a national initiative that advocates affordable healthcare for everyone. Raising Women’s Voices wants to ensure the national discourse on healthcare reform takes the needs of women into account. Other founding members include Mergerwatch and the Avery Institute for Social Change. Raising Women’s Voices includes a list of 26 principles including: The NWHN publishes independently researched fact sheets and position papers on a variety of women’s health topics including breast cancer, endometriosis, cervical cancer, fibroids, menopause and hormonal therapy, mammograms, abortion, and hysterectomy. Every publication is from an objective, feminist perspective without endorsing any specific treatment plan or method.[5] The National Women's Health Network publishes a bimonthly newsletter, the Women’s Health Voice. The Voice has been in circulation since 1976, but was known as the Network News up until 2001. The Voice includes articles by NWHN board members, staff members, and contributors from diverse organizations and institutions. Recent contributors have included the National Asian Pacific American Women’s Forum, Georgetown University, the National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health, PharmedOut, and SisterLove, Inc. Content consists of independently researched articles on current events, health policy, awareness campaigns, informational topics, and medical updates. Articles in the Voice have spoken out against many government actions including the FDA’s re-approval of silicone gel breast implants. The newsletter also includes a Young Feminist section, written by current interns or other young professionals in the health activist field. 
