 full protection: high level of unauthorized modifications; government agency. The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), of the U.S. National Institutes of Health, conducts and supports research on many of the most serious diseases affecting public health. The Institute supports much of the clinical research on the diseases of internal medicine and related subspecialty fields as well as many basic science disciplines. The mission of NIDDK is to conduct and support medical research and research training and to disseminate science-based information on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutritional disorders, and obesity; and kidney, urologic, and hematologic diseases, to improve people’s health and quality of life. The NIDDK supports a wide range of medical research through grants to universities and other medical research institutions across the country. The Institute also supports government scientists who conduct basic, translational, and clinical research across a broad spectrum of research topics and serious, chronic diseases and conditions related to the Institute's mission. In addition, the NIDDK supports research training for students and scientists at various stages of their careers and a range of education and outreach programs to bring science-based information to patients and their families, health care professionals, and the public. External research funded by the NIDDK is organized into three scientific program divisions: Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases; Digestive Diseases and Nutrition; and Kidney, Urologic, and Hematologic Diseases. The NIDDK’s overarching principles in moving research forward include:maintaining a vigorous, investigator-initiated research portfolio that supports cross-cutting science that can be broadly applied to many disease-specific research areas; supporting pivotal clinical studies and trials, with a focus on substantial participation from minority and underserved groups; preserving a stable pool of talented new investigators; fostering exceptional research training and mentoring opportunities; and ensuring that science-based health information reaches patients, their families, health care providers and the public through communications and outreach activities. On August 15, 1950, President Harry S. Truman signed the Omnibus Medical Research Act into law, establishing the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases, the forerunner to the NIDDK. In the ensuing years, the Institute was renamed several times. In 1986, one of the Institute's former Divisions became the core of a new, separate NIH component focused on arthritis and other diseases, and the Institute acquired its current name: the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Griffin P. Rodgers, M.D., M.A.C.P., was named director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK)—one of the National Institutes of Health (NIH)—on April 1, 2007. Dr. Rodgers had served as the NIDDK's acting director since March 2006 and was the Institute's deputy director from 2001-2009. Dr. Rodgers also has been chief of the Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch since 1998. The branch is now administratively managed by the NIH's National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Dr. Rodgers received his undergraduate, graduate, and medical degrees from Brown University in Providence, RI. He performed his residency and chief residency in internal medicine at Barnes Hospital and the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. His fellowship training in hematology/oncology was through a joint program of the NIH with George Washington University and the Washington Veterans Administration Medical Center. In addition to his medical and research training, Dr. Rodgers earned a master's degree in business administration, with a focus on the business of medicine, from Johns Hopkins University in 2005. As a research investigator, Dr. Rodgers is widely recognized for his contributions to the development of the first effective, and now FDA-approved, therapy for sickle cell anemia. He was a principal investigator in clinical trials to develop therapy for patients with sickle cell disease. He also performed basic research that focused on understanding the molecular basis of how certain drugs induce gamma-globin gene expression. Recently, he and his collaborators have reported on a modified blood stem-cell transplant regimen that is highly effective in reversing sickle cell disease in adults and is associated with relatively low toxicity. Dr. Rodgers has been honored for his research with numerous awards, including the 1998 Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Foundation Award, the 2000 Arthur S. Flemming Award, the Legacy of Leadership Award in 2002, and a Mastership from the American College of Physicians in 2005. Dr. Rodgers has been an invited professor at medical schools and hospitals in France, Italy, China, Japan, and Korea. He has been honored with many named lectureships at American medical centers. He has published over 200 original research articles, reviews, and book chapters and has edited four books and monographs. Dr. Rodgers served as governor to the American College of Physicians for the Department of Health and Human Services from 1994 to 1997. He is a member of the American Society of Hematology, the American Society of Clinical Investigation, the Association of American Physicians, and the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, among others. He served as chair of the Hematology Subspecialty Board and a member of the American Board of Internal Medicine Board of Directors. Dr. Rodgers is board certified in internal medicine, emergency medicine, and hematology. The Division of Intramural Research oversees research and training conducted within the NIDDK’s laboratories and clinical facilities by government scientists in Bethesda, MD, and Phoenix, AZ. Several of NIDDK's intramural scientists have received national and international awards for scientific excellence. The division includes 10 branches, nine laboratories, and four offices, which focus on issues of technology transfer, fellow recruitment and career development, and the overall management of the division’s basic and clinical research efforts. In addition, nine core facilities provide centralized scientific support services to the laboratories and branches. The intramural branches conduct basic, translational, and clinical biomedical research related to diabetes mellitus, endocrine, bone and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, including liver diseases and nutritional disorders; kidney diseases; and hematologic diseases. The NIDDK’s intramural labs are involved in fundamental research in biophysics; cell biology; chemical biology and medicinal chemistry; developmental biology; genetics, pathogenesis, and novel therapies of disease; molecular biology; signal transduction; and structural biology. The Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases (DEM) supports research, research training, and career development related to a vast and diverse range of diseases and conditions, including diabetes mellitus, obesity, osteoporosis, cystic fibrosis, thyroid and other endocrine disorders, and metabolic diseases. The division also leads the administration of trans-NIH diabetes research; coordinates federally supported, diabetes-related activities; promotes public awareness and education about diabetes and other diseases; and collects and disseminates data. Diabetes Research Programs Endocrinology Research Programs Metabolic Diseases Research Programs Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee The Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee (DMICC) coordinates diabetes research and activities across the NIH and other federal programs. The division director chairs the DMICC, which includes representatives from all federal departments and agencies whose programs involve health functions and responsibilities relevant to diabetes and its complications. National Diabetes Data Group The DEM's National Diabetes Data Group serves as the federal lead for collecting, analyzing, and sharing data on diabetes and its complications. The group draws on the expertise of the research, medical, and lay communities to support its data initiatives. For more information about these initiatives, see "Health Information and Education Services." The Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition (DDN) supports research related to digestive diseases, including the alimentary tract, liver and pancreas, nutrition and obesity. The programs include basic, translational and clinical research. DDN also promotes public awareness and education about digestive diseases and related conditions, and oversees several national public awareness campaigns. Alimentary Tract Research Programs: Liver Disease Research Programs: Pancreas Research Programs: Obesity Research Programs: Nutrition Sciences Research Programs: Cross-Cutting Programs: The division oversees the following health education and awareness campaigns: For more information about these initiatives, see "Health Information and Education Services." The Division of Kidney, Urologic, and Hematologic (KUH) Diseases provides research funding and support for basic, translational, and clinical research studies of the kidney, urinary tract, and disorders of the blood and blood-forming organs. The division also provides funding for training and career development of people committed to academic and clinical research in these areas. Kidney Diseases Research Programs Urological Diseases Research Programs Hematology Research Programs Heme-Net program The division oversees the following health education and awareness campaigns: For more information about these initiatives, see "Health Information and Education Services." The Division of Extramural Activities (DEA) provides leadership, oversight, tools, and guidance to manage the NIDDK's grants policies and operations, including efforts related to the scientific peer review process for assessing grant applications. The DEA also coordinates the NIDDK's committee management activities and Advisory Council meetings, and performs and coordinates programmatic analyses and evaluation activities. The DEA is organized into three primary components: Office of Minority Health Research Coordination The NIDDK director created the Office of Minority Health Research Coordination (OMHRC) to address diseases and disorders that disproportionately affect minority populations. The OMHRC helps implement the Institute's strategic plan for health disparities and build on the strong partnership with the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities at the NIH. Office of Obesity Research The NIDDK Office of Obesity Research coordinates obesity-related research within the NIDDK and carries out its functions through the NIDDK Obesity Research Working Group. The co-directors represent the two divisions primarily responsible for obesity-related extramural research: DDN and DEM. The Obesity Research Working Group includes representatives of DDN, DEM, KUH, the NIDDK Review Branch, the Office of Scientific Program and Policy Analysis (OSPPA), the Office of Communications and Public Liaison (OCPL), and the NIH Division of Nutrition Research Coordination (DNRC). The working group The NIDDK Clinical Obesity Research Panel (CORP) is the successor to the National Task Force on Prevention and Treatment of Obesity. The NIDDK CORP, composed of leading obesity researchers and clinicians, is charged with providing advice to the NIDDK Advisory Council on important clinical research needs related to obesity prevention and treatment, including their relative priority and costs, and identifies concepts for future clinical studies of obesity. The CORP serves in an advisory capacity to the Weight-control Information Network. The CORP is placed organizationally under the auspices of the NIDDK Advisory Council. NIDDK Clearinghouses The NIDDK operates three clearinghouses that provide information about diabetes, digestive diseases, and kidney and urologic diseases to patients, their families, health professionals, and the general public: Each clearinghouse was authorized by Congress to increase knowledge and understanding about these areas by disseminating information. The clearinghouses launched two additional information services in 2004 to focus on additional NIDDK-related conditions such as hormone and blood disorders: The clearinghouses and information services translate science into easy-to-understand information for the public. They provide print and online information and resources for patients, the public, and health professionals, including many easy-to-read publications available in several languages and in large print. The clearinghouses answer inquiries and work closely with professional and patient-advocacy organizations and U.S. government agencies to coordinate resources on relevant topics. NIDDK Public Awareness Campaigns The clearinghouses also manage three public awareness campaigns directed at conditions that are frequently underdiagnosed or untreated: The Celiac Disease Awareness Campaign promotes public awareness about the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of celiac disease. The NDDIC-based campaign provides current, comprehensive, science-based information about the disease, including news, e-blasts, feature stories, educational materials and resources, practice guidelines, and contacts for patient-advocacy and not-for-profit organizations devoted to celiac disease awareness. The NDDIC's "Let's Talk about Bowel Control" awareness campaign provides resources to health care providers and the public about how to talk about and manage problems with bowel control. Resources include news, information about research and clinical trials, fact sheets, online tools, and links to other organizations. To raise awareness about the common but infrequently discussed problem of urinary incontinence, the NKUDIC created the "Bladder Control for Women" awareness campaign, which promotes resources to help women understand the condition and talk about it with their doctors. A booklet, fact sheets, online diary, poster, and other resources are available from the campaign. National Diabetes Education Program The National Diabetes Education Program (NDEP), co-sponsored by the NIDDK and the CDC, raises awareness and educates the public about preventing and controlling diabetes. The NDEP develops education activities targeted toward people with diabetes and their families, people at risk for type 2 diabetes, health care providers, policymakers, and payers of health care costs. National Kidney Disease Education Program The National Kidney Disease Education Program (NKDEP) is a National Institutes of Health initiative designed to reduce morbidity and mortality caused by kidney disease and its complications among communities most affected by kidney failure, including African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans. NKDEP aims to improve early detection of chronic kidney disease (CKD), slow the progression of CKD, promote evidence-based interventions, and support the coordination of Federal responses to CKD. A variety of materials is available for laboratory and health care professionals, people with kidney disease and their families, and the general public. Resources include fact sheets, data, reports, brochures, online tools and videos. Ways to Enhance Children’s Activity and Nutrition (We Can!) The national We Can! campaign supports parents, caregivers, and entire communities in helping children 8 to 13 years old maintain a healthy weight. Four institutes of the NIH have come together to produce the campaign: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; in collaboration with NIDDK; the National Cancer Institute; and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The initiative offers organizations, community groups, and health professionals a centralized resource to promote healthy weight through community outreach, partnership development, and media activities. Science-based educational programs, support materials, training opportunities, and other resources are available to support programming for youth, parents, and families in the community. Weight-control Information Network The Weight-control Information Network (WIN) creates and disseminates to the public, patients, health professionals and media up-to-date, science-based information on weight control, obesity, physical activity, and related nutritional issues. An e-newsletter, research, brochures, fact sheets, and other resources are available through WIN. 
