 The National Search and Rescue Program (NSP) is the name given by the Government of Canada to the collective search and rescue (SAR) activities in Canada. The NSP is administered by the National Search and Rescue Secretariat (NSS) and it provides for the coordination of public policy for the provision of SAR services. The primary goal of the NSP is to save lives at risk throughout Canada's Search and Rescue Region of Responsibility (SRR); this includes all of Canada's land mass as well as areas of the Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic oceans as designated by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The NSP involves federal departments, provincial and territorial governments, municipalities, non-profit organizations, and volunteers working together to provide search and rescue in Canada. The Lead Minister for Search and Rescue (LMSAR) in the Government of Canada is the Minister of National Defence.Responsibilities are broken down within the federal government as follows: The Department of National Defence is the lead ministry responsible for providing and coordinating SAR response for incidents involving aircraft, and incidents involving vessels in federal or international waters. This is accomplished through the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF), which operates 3 Joint Rescue Coordination Centres (JRCCs) as well as various dedicated SAR squadrons of helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. The three JRCCs are: The Department of Fisheries and Oceans, through the Canadian Coast Guard (CCG), is tasked with responding to emergencies involving vessels that occur in waters of federal responsibility (all navigable ocean waters on Canada's Atlantic, Pacific and Arctic coasts, plus the Great Lakes, St. Lawrence River, and portions of connecting waterways). CCG personnel, in coordination with RCAF personnel, also staff the 3 JRCCs and CCG exclusively staffs a Maritime Rescue Sub-Centre (MRSC): Maritime Rescue Sub-Centre Quebec. There was also an MRSC located in St. John's, Newfoundland until it was closed for budget cuts in early 2012. The National Search and Rescue Secretariat (NSS) is an independent agency of the federal government, reporting to the LMSAR, and supports and promotes the activities of the National SAR Program (NSP) as a means to achieve highly effective and economically responsible search and rescue programs throughout Canada. The NSS was established as a national coordinating authority for SAR policy in Canada; this was one of the key recommendations resulting from the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Ocean Ranger disaster. The Department of Transport, through its civil aviation and marine safety programs, plays a supporting role to the NSP by working to prevent air and marine transport incidents requiring a search and rescue response. This is accomplished through policies relating to regulations, inspections, enforcement, and safety promotion functions. Air resources for responding to search and rescue incidents in Canada are coordinated by, and often supplied by, the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF). Due to their rapid response, air resources are often the first equipment tasked to respond in remote inland, coastal or offshore locations, regardless of whether it is for an aircraft or marine incident. Marine resources for responding to search and rescue incidents in Canada are coordinated by, and often supplied by, the Canadian Coast Guard (CCG). Marine resources are most often tasked to respond to a marine incident in waters of federal jurisdiction, however, they can also be tasked to respond to incidents involving an aircraft if that should also occur in waters of federal jurisdiction. Within Canada's national parks, SAR resources and operations are supplied and coordinated by Parks Canada. This also includes national marine conservation areas, national park reserves, national historic sites, and national historic canals. In larger national parks that see a high degree of visitor usage, or have unique dangers for park visitors (e.g. ocean waters, mountains, back country, etc.), Parks Canada supplies its own dedicated SAR resources in the form of specialized staff and equipment. Parks Canada often requests support from other federal resources, including the RCAF, CCG, Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) as well as provincial/territorial or municipal resources, depending on the location of the incident. In areas of provincial or territorial jurisdiction (e.g. on land or in inland lakes and rivers that are non-federal waters), SAR resources are coordinated by provincial or territorial governments. Response to, and the coordination and supply of resources to, a ground or inland water SAR incident in a province or territory is the responsibility of the provincial or territorial police agency (or a municipal police agency). That police agency, in coordination with the provincial or territorial (or municipal) government, may request federal resources to assist in responding to a ground or inland water SAR incident. This is often in the form of RCAF or CASARA aircraft and occasionally in the form of CCG or CCGA vessels (usually trailer deployed small craft). These requests are coordinated through inter-government agreements. All provinces and territories have volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) organizations that assist the responding police agency by providing the large amount of manpower necessary for a ground search, as well as specialized expertise, equipment, and local knowledge. The Search and Rescue Volunteer Association of Canada (SARVAC) is the national body representing ground and inland water SAR volunteers in Canada. In British Columbia, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is Emergency Management BC. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in British Columbia and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the BC Search and Rescue Association. In Alberta, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Alberta Emergency Management Agency. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in Alberta and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the SAR Association of Alberta. In Saskatchewan, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Saskatchewan Emergency Management Organization. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in Saskatchewan and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Search and Rescue Saskatchewan Association of Volunteers. In Manitoba, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Manitoba Emergency Measures Organization. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in Saskatchewan and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by Search and Rescue Manitoba. In Ontario, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is Emergency Management Ontario. The Ontario Provincial Police (OPP) provides all provincial policing services in Ontario and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Ontario Search and Rescue Volunteer Association. In Quebec, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Ministère de la Sécurité publique. The Sûreté du Québec (SQ) provides all provincial policing services in Quebec and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Association Quebeçoise des Bénévoles en Recherche et Sauvetage. In New Brunswick, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the New Brunswick Emergency Measures Organization. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in New Brunswick and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the New Brunswick Ground Search and Rescue Association. In Prince Edward Island, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Prince Edward Island Emergency Measures Organization. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in Prince Edward Island and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Prince Edward Island Ground Search and Rescue Association. In Nova Scotia, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Nova Scotia Emergency Management Office. The RCMP is contracted to provide provincial policing services in Nova Scotia and they, or a municipal police force, are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Nova Scotia Ground Search and Rescue Association. In Newfoundland and Labrador, the provincial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is Fire and Emergency Services-Newfoundland and Labrador. Policing services in Newfoundland and Labrador are shared between the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary (RNC) in urban areas and the RCMP in rural areas. These police agencies are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the province. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Newfoundland and Labrador Search and Rescue Association. In the Yukon, the territorial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Yukon Emergency Measures Organization. The RCMP is contracted to provide policing services in the Yukon and are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the territory. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Yukon Search and Rescue Association. In the Northwest Territories, the territorial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is the Northwest Territories Emergency Measures Organization. The RCMP is contracted to provide policing services in the Northwest Territories and are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the territory. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Northwest Territories Search and Rescue Association. In Nunavut, the territorial government agency responsible for coordinating volunteer ground and inland water SAR is Nunavut Emergency Management. The RCMP is contracted to provide policing services in Nunavut and are responsible for responding to ground and inland water SAR incidents in the territory. Volunteer ground search and rescue (GSAR) teams are represented by the Nunavut Search and Rescue Association. 
