 National Fibromyalgia Association (NFA) is a United States nonprofit organization founded to support persons with fibromyalgia (FM) and other chronic pain illnesses. The National Fibromyalgia Association's mission is to help people affected by FM by organizing awareness events, media coverage, support and training for support group leaders across the United States. The NFA produces informational materials, hosts patient and health care provider web sites, and publishes the magazine Fibromyalgia AWARE. First known as the National Fibromyalgia Awareness Campaign, the NFA was founded as a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization in 1997 in Orange, California, by Lynne Matallana and Karen Lee Richards. Since then, the NFA has developed the educational website FMaware.org in 2002, founded the international magazine quarterly Fibromyalgia AWARE as the only consumer magazine on fibromyalgia published in the United States, and advocated the development of continuing medical educational programs. Through 2006, the NFA hosted six international conferences, featuring authorities on fibromyalgia who presented their research and expertise to attendees, including patients and health care professionals. More than 1,000 people attended the 2006 FAME (Fibromyalgia Awareness Means Everything) conference. The NFA partnered with Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and the Institute of John Hopkins Nursing in 2007, to form “The Fibromyalgia Circle of Care”, a collaboration that hold three annual initiatives that work to assist healthcare providers in diagnosing fibromyalgia, raising awareness of the condition, and taking care of patients diagnosed with the illness. The NFA has been covered by various media sources, including National Public Radio, Newsweek, The Gazette, Co-founders Matallana and Richards have both been diagnosed with fibromyalgia. They first met in 1997 through discussions in online fibromyalgia chat groups, and shared similar concerns over incorrect diagnoses as well as a lack of available information and patient support. Matallana had first experienced symptoms of pain and fatigue in 1993, and by 1997 had visited 37 doctors before being diagnosed with fibromyalgia. 
