 The National Medical Students’ Conference is an annual gathering of medical students in the Philippines. Organized by the Asian Medical Students’ Association (AMSA)-Philippines, NMSC provides medical students a venue to interact with and learn from each other outside the confines of the classroom, laboratory and hospital. It is under the jurisdiction of the Internal Vice President of AMSA Philippines. The two-day event includes five core parts: Conference Proper, AMSA Philippines Research Competition, AMSA Philippines Organizational Meetings, Socials Night and NMSC Workshops. NMSC combines key characteristics of both the Asian Medical Students’ Conference (AMSC) of AMSA International and the General Assemblies of the International Federation of Medical Students’ Associations (IFMSA). Distinguished leaders and pioneers in Philippine medicine discuss about the current issues in their respective fields through keynote addresses, plenary lectures and panel discussions. Small group discussions also facilitate further learning and interaction among participants. The AMSA Philippines Research Competition began in NMSC 2011. It is open to medical students in all bona fide Philippine medical schools. An initial pre-NMSC screening process categorizes the entries as qualified for oral competition, qualified for poster competition or unqualified. The judges for the initial screening usually hail from editors of established Philippine medical journals such as Acta Medica Philippina. The winning entries on both oral and poster competitions represent AMSA Philippines in the succeeding AMSC, and qualified entries may be published in partner journals including the International Journal of Students’ Research. NMSC also acts as the venue for various presentations of the national officers regarding the accomplishments of their standing committees for the past year and the new and upcoming partnerships and opportunities ahead. Furthermore, the Executive Board congregates to elect on the membership status of Candidate Member Organizations. Lastly the National Elections are constitutionally held during NMSC, where presidents and/or liaison officers of the Local Member Organizations act as primary voters. As is norm in every AMSA International and IFMSA event, the Socials Night provides venues for members from all over the country to interact amongst each other and participate in various social activities, furthering the strength and goals of the organization. A pre-conference socials night may also be held. Each delegate is tasked to select from a list of available workshops tailored to supplement the conference theme. Most of the workshops are highly skills-based and are not taught within the confines of the classroom and hospital. The workshops themselves engage the participants to greater learning opportunities. NMSC 2011 was the first of its kind in three years. It was held in the University of the Philippines College of Medicine on April 2–3, 2011, in partnership with UP Medical Students for Social Responsibility – International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War (UP MSSR-IPPNW). The conference tackled the opportunities and obstacles on how Filipino future physicians can become holistic and relevant doctors for the Filipinos – as clinicians, teachers, researchers, managers, and social mobilizers. Participants engaged in healthy and dynamic discussions about the field of medicine in the Philippines as well as meet successful and inspiring models from different sectors of the Philippine health system.The opening keynote address Making the Five-Star Filipino Physician was delivered by the then Philippine Health Secretary Enrique Ona, MD. The closing keynote speech Health in the Hands of the People: The Role of the Five-Star Physicians in Achieving Health for All was delivered by Former Health Secretary Jaime Galvez Tan, MD. NMSC 2012 is being hosted by the UP MSSR-IPPNW and is set on March 31-April 1, 2012 in the Calderon Hall of UP College of Medicine. In the midst of changing themes and trends in the field of medicine, this year’s two-day conference aims to spread awareness about the emerging threats, modern innovations and surfacing social issues that involve the Philippine health care system. The conference will include dynamic lectures and interactive group discussions about the future of medicine in the Philippine setting. Participants will be able to meet with representatives of emerging medical professions and specialty services in innovative lectures that would give them a glimpse of the diversity of careers and opportunities in the medical profession. After gaining insight into the shifting paradigms and practices in today’s medicine, the conference aims to equip the participants the knowledge and skills that would enable them to better face the challenges of the coming age. The preconference night shall give the participating delegates a taste of Manila nightlife as they navigate through key destinations in the spirit of camaraderie and competition. NMSC 2012 Socials Night shall showcase the diverse talents and various cultures from the different medical schools across the regions. These jetsetters are set to travel all over the Philippines bringing with them their very own stylishness and flair while delivering utmost quality care to Filipino patients. Each participating school is appointed a booth to hold games, offer finger foods, and showcase its pride. Furthermore, each delegate shall be given a boarding pass of his/her respective seat assignment, bringing another opportunity to interact with students from other schools. The inflight entertainment involves performances from the delegates, interspersed with games and raffle draws. Special awards are also to be given away. !! NMSC Manila 2011 !! NMSC UP Manila 2012 AMSA Philippines IVP Ryan Joseph Magtibay Ryan Joseph Magtibay Host Local Member Organization UP MSSR-IPPNW UP MSSR - IPPNW Overall Chair Ryan Joseph Magtibay Greco Mark Malijan Secretary General Kimberly Mae Ong Paula Victoria Catherine Cheng Program Committee Head/s || Christelle Anne Almanon, Ramon Luis Lorenzo Guinto || Karina Terese Santos, Jim Paulo Sarsagat Logistics Committee Head's Roland Reuben Angeles Dexter Bryan Cancino, Alicia de Castro Finance Committee Head/s || Abigail Chan, Paula Victoria Catherine Cheng || Hiyas Singson, Zimri Tan Research Committee Head/s || Dalvie Agbayani Casilang, Adovich Rivera || Jonnel Poblete, Bettina Quiambao Registration Committee Head/s || Christine Doval-Santos || Davidson Pastrana Socials Committee Head/s || Leah Antoinette Caro, Richard Cariño III || Anna Monica Pastoral Publicity Committee Head/s|| Jose Pedrito Magno, Greco Mark Malijan || Nikolai Gil Reyes Souvenir Program Committee Head/s || Nicole Bernardo || Kris Conrad Mangunay, Lyndon Pardo Web Committee Head/s || Laureen Lukban || Giselle Gayle Gozum Documentation Committee Head/s || Kimberly Mae Ong || Giselle Gayle Gozum 
