 Natural Cycle IVF is IVF without the use of stimulating drugs. In stimulated IVF/ICSI cycles the patient takes drugs to stimulate her ovaries to produce multiple eggs. With natural cycle IVF the treatment cycle relies on the spontaneous development of one follicle only and therefore the aspiration of only one egg from the follicle (it is possible however that the cycle can have more than one egg or no eggs). There is nothing new about natural cycle IVF, in fact Louise Brown, the world’s first ‘test-tube baby' was conceived using this method in 1978. No stimulating drugs are given but drugs may be given to prevent spontaneous ovulation. This is called a Controlled Natural Cycle. In addition the patient will need to take hCG (as with other less invasive treatments such as ovulation monitoring and intrauterine insemination) to time egg collection as well as progesterone pessaries to supplement the body’s progesterone levels. Progesterone aids implantation and supports pregnancy in its early stages. Natural cycle IVF is suitable for all women who ovulate naturally. It has been particularly effective in older women and in those who have responded poorly to stimulating drugs. It can also be suitable for women who want to avoid ovarian stimulation or fertility drugs as a matter of choice, and indeed for those for whom there may be no other choice, such as women at risk of hormone-related cancers. There is no suppression of the ovaries and associated menopausal symptoms and the treatment cycle is completed within a woman’s own menstrual cycle. There are no side-effects such as ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), bloating, mood changes or other concerns relating to ovarian stimulation. Due to the effect of ovarian stimulation drugs on the body, patients undergoing stimulation cannot pursue consecutive cycles of treatment and need to take 2–3 months break between treatment cycles. In contrast, natural cycle patients can repeat their treatment in consecutive cycles. As only one embryo is transferred in a natural cycle, there is virtually no risk of a multiple pregnancy. Furthermore, ovarian stimulation drugs are expensive and this means that the cost of natural cycles is significantly less. The success rate per cycle is low compared to stimulated IVF. There is also a small risk of spontaneous ovulation before egg collection.Natural cycle IVF is not suitable for those who do not ovulate spontaneously. Instead they will need a Mild Stimulation option. Mild IVF, sometimes called Soft IVF or IVF Lite, is aimed at producing 2-7 eggs. It does not involve shutting down the hormones for 2 weeks. It is conducted in the woman’s natural menstrual cycle. Smaller dosages of stimulating drugs are given for a shorter period to help ripen the 2-7 eggs. Spontaneous ovulation is blocked with injections so that eggs could be collected. It is safer, less expensive and avoids side-effects associated with suppression of hormones in a conventional IVF cycle. It also reduces the risk of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome (OHSS). Terminology !! Aim !! Methodology Natural cycle IVF Single oocyte No medication Modified Natural cycle IVF Single oocyte hCG only Antagonist & FSH add-back Mild stimulation IVF 2-7 oocytes Low dose FSH, oral compounds & antagonist/agonist Conventional IVF ≥8 oocytes Downregulation weak agonist 
