 The neglected diseases are a group of tropical infections which are especially endemic in low-income populations in developing regions of Africa, Asia, and the Americas. Different organizations define the set of diseases differently. In sub-Saharan Africa, the impact of these diseases as a group is comparable to malaria and tuberculosis.Some of these diseases have known preventive measures or acute medical treatments which are available in the developed world but which are not universally available in poorer areas. In some cases, the treatments are relatively inexpensive. For example, the treatment for schistosomiasis is USD $0.20 per child per year. Nevertheless, control of neglected diseases is estimated to require funding of between US$2 billion to US$3 billion over the next five to seven years. These diseases are contrasted with the big three diseases (HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria), which generally receive greater treatment and research funding. The neglected diseases can also make HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis more deadly. However, some pharmaceutical companies have committed to donating all the drug therapies required and mass drug administration has been successfully accomplished in several countries. Neglected tropical diseases include in order of decreasing prevalence: The World Health Organization (WHO) list of neglected tropical diseases also adds the following additional diseases: Cysticercosis, Dengue/dengue haemorrhagic fever, Echinococcosis, Fascioliasis, Rabies, Yaws; and includes two other 'neglected' conditions’: Podoconiosis (also known as elephantiasis) and Snakebite. Lack of intervention makes treating neglected diseases a priority, though efforts to do so are chronically underfunded. There are currently only two donor-fundable charities that focus exclusively on NTDs:the Schistosomiasis Control Initiative and Deworm the World. Despite the lack of funding, neglected diseases are very cheap to treat and prevent. The cost of treating a child for infection of soil transmitted helminths and schistosomes (some of the main causes of neglected diseases, as listed above), is less than US $0.50 per year, when administered as part of mass school-based deworming by Deworm the World. This programme is recommended by Giving What We Can and the Copenhagen Consensus Centre as one of the most efficient and cost-effective solutions available for such issues.The long term benefits of these interventions include a decrease in school absenteeism by 25%, and an increase in adult earnings by 20%.The efforts of Schistosomiasis Control Initiative to combat neglected diseases include the use of rapid impact packages; supplying schools with packages including four or five drugs, and training teachers in how to administer them. This is so cheap and effective that it has often been called the 'best buy in public health'. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration priority review voucher is an incentive for companies to invest in new drugs and vaccines for tropical diseases. A provision of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (HR 3580) awards a transferable “priority review voucher” to any company that obtains approval for a treatment for one of the listed diseases. The voucher can later be used to accelerate review of an unrelated drug. This program is for all tropical diseases and includes medicines for malaria and tuberculosis. The first voucher given was for Coartem, a malaria treatment. It does not use or define the term "neglected" though most of the diseases listed are often included on lists of neglected diseases. The prize was proposed by Duke University faculty Henry Grabowski, Jeffrey Moe, and David Ridley in their 2006 Health Affairs paper: "Developing Drugs for Developing Countries." In 2007 United States Senators Sam Brownback (R-KS) and Sherrod Brown (D-OH) sponsored an amendment to the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007. President George W. Bush signed the bill in September 2007. Biotechnology companies in the developing world have targeted neglected tropical diseases due to need to improve global health. 
