 The NHS constitution for England is a formal constitution which, in one document, lays down the objectives of the National Health Service, the rights and responsibilities of the various parties involved in health care, (patients, staff, trust boards) and the guiding principles which govern the service. First published on 21 January 2009 it was one of a number of recommendations in Lord Darzi’s report ‘High Quality Care for All’ as part of a ten-year plan to provide the highest quality of care and service for patients in England. Previously these rights and responsibilities had evolved in common law or through English or EU law, or were policy pledges by the NHS and UK government have now been written into the constitution. The NHS grants patients rights which are intended to be legally enforceable and also makes other non-binding pledges. These are in the areas of access; quality of care and encvironment; access to treatments, medicines and screening programmes; Respect, consent and confidentiality; informed choice; patient involvement in healthcare and public involvemenst in the NHS; and complaints and redress. The Constitution is a fairly brief document that is written in plain terms and is simple to understand. Accompanying the constitution is a handbook which gives more information to patients and staff about the constitution, a statement of NHS accountability gives a clear account of the NHS system of accountability and responsibility. In summary, the guiding principles of the NHS are that The NHS grants patients rights which are intended to be legally enforceable and also makes other non-binding pledges. These are in the areas of access; quality of care and encvironment; access to treatments, medicines and screening programmes; Respect, consent and confidentiality; informed choice; patient involvement in healthcare and public involvemenst in the NHS; and complaints and redress. The constitution defines RIGHTS regarding access to health care which will be The NHS also make pledges that access to health care will be convenient and easy to access within defined waiting times; based on decision making that will be clear and transparent, and that transfers from one provider to another will be as smooth as possible and that patients will be involved in all relevant discussions. The constitution defines RIGHTS regarding quality of care and environment as follows add pledges that services will be provided in a clean and safe environment that is fit for purpose, based on national best practice and that there will be a continuous improvement in the quality of services, identifying and sharing best practice. The constitution defines rights regarding approved treatments, drugs and programmes. Patients have the right to and pledges to provide screening programmes as recommended by the UK National Screening Committee. With regard to RIGHTS regarding Respect, consent and confidentiality the NHS constitution gives patients the right to and pledges that it will share with patients any letters sent between clinicians about their care. Patients are given rights under the constitution in relation to informed choice including the right to The NHS also pledges to inform patients about the healthcare services available locally and nationally and will offer easily accessible, reliable and relevant information to enable patients to participate fully in their own healthcare decisions and to support them in making choices. This includes information on the quality of clinical services where there is robust and accurate information available. The NHS recognized fully that the population has RIGHTS regarding Involvement in their own health care and in the NHS. There are rights to The NHS also pledges to provide the information needed for the people to influence and scrutinise the planning and delivery of NHS services and to work in partnership with patients, their family, carers and their representatives. It also pledges continuous improvement in the quality of services provided, identifying and sharing best practice in quality of care and treatments. When complaining or seeking redress, patients are given RIGHTS to The NHS also pledges to ensure patients are treated with courtesy and receive appropriate support throughout the handling of a complaint, and the fact that they have made a complaint will not adversely affect their future treatment. When mistakes happen, the NHS promises to acknowledge them, apologise, explain what went wrong and put things right quickly and effectively. It promises that the organisation will learn lessons from complaints and will use them to improve NHS services. 
