 Noma, also known as cancrum oris or gangrenous stomatitis, is a gangrenous disease leading to tissue destruction of the face, especially the mouth and cheek. Noma is a rapidly progressive, polymicrobial, opportunistic infection that occurs during periods of compromised immune function. Fusobacterium necrophorum and Prevotella intermedia are thought to be key players in the process and interact with one or more other bacterial organisms (such as Borrelia vincentii, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella forsynthesis, Treponema denticola, Staphylococcus aureus, and nonhemolytic Streptococcus spp). The reported predisposing factors include: Noma was observed in Nazi concentration camps in World War II, and was studied by Nazi physician Josef Mengele. In many cases a recent debilitating illness, usually measles and sometimes herpes simplex, varicella (chicken pox), scarlet fever, malaria, tuberculosis, gastroenteritis or bronchopneumonia, precedes the appearance of noma as well as cancers such as leukemia. In many instances the infection begins as necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (NUG). Early presentation is unclear as noma is often well progressed at initial presentation. Noma, unlike most infections, is able to spread through anatomic barriers such as muscle. In the developed world, noma has virtually disappeared except for an occasional case related to immunosuppressive conditions such as HIV infection, severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome, or intense immunosuppressive therapy. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates the global yearly incidence to be approximately 140,000, of which 100,000 are between 1 and 7 years old and living in sub-Saharan Africa. The mucous membranes of the mouth develop ulcers, and rapid, painless tissue degeneration ensues, which can degrade tissues of the bones in the face. In a condition sometimes called noma pudendi, noma can also cause tissue damage to the genitals. The disease is associated with high morbidity and mortality and mainly affects children under the age of twelve in the poorest countries of Africa. Children in Asia and some countries of South America are also affected. Most children who get the disease are between the ages of two and six years old. The WHO estimates that 500,000 people are affected, and that 140,000 new cases are reported each year. Estimates claim that 80-90% of noma cases die from the disease. Known in antiquity to such physicians as Hippocrates and Galen, noma was once reported around the world, including Europe and the United States. With improvements in hygiene and nutrition, noma has disappeared from industrialized countries since the 20th Century, except during World War II when it was endemic to Auschwitz and Belsen concentration camps. The disease and treatments were studied by Berthold Epstein, a Czech physician and forced-labor prisoner who had recommended the study under Josef Mengele's direction. The progression of the disease can be halted with the use of antibiotics and improved nutrition; however, its physical effects are permanent and may require reconstructive plastic surgery to repair. Reconstruction is usually very challenging and should be delayed until full recovery (usually about one year following initial intervention). Children and other noma survivors in Africa are helped by a few international charitable organizations, such as Facing Africa, a UK registered charity that helps Ethiopian sufferers. There is one dedicated noma hospital in Nigeria, the Noma Children Hospital Sokoto, staffed by resident and visiting medical teams. In other countries, such as Ethiopia, international charities work in collaboration with the local health care system to provide complex reconstructive surgery which can give back facial functions such as eating, speaking and smiling. Teams of volunteer medics coming from abroad are often needed to support the local capacity to address the most severe cases, which can be extremely challenging even for senior maxillofacial surgeons. On 10 June 2010 the work of such volunteer surgeons was featured in a UK BBC Two documentary presented by Ben Fogle, Make Me a New Face: Hope for Africa's Hidden Children. The Surgical Treatment of noma by Kurt Boss and Klaas Marck. ISBN 978-90-71736-31-5 
