 Many terms are used in mechanical ventilation, some are specific to brand, model, trademark and mode of mechanical ventilation. There is a standardized nomenclature of mechanical ventilation that is specific about nomenclature related to modes, but not settings and variables. Volume Controlled Continuous Mandatory Ventilation — (VC-CMV) Mechanical ventilation with preset tidal volume and inspiratory flow. Every breath is mandatory (i.e.,inspiration is patient or machine trigged and machine cycled). Volume Controlled Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation — (VC-IMV) Mechanical ventilation with preset tidal volume and inspiratory flow. Spontaneous breaths (i.e., inspiration is patient triggered and patient cycled) can exist between mandatory breaths. Pressure Controlled Continuous Mandatory Ventilation — (PC-CMV) Mechanical ventilation with preset inspiratory pressure and inspiratory time. Every breath is mandatory (i.e. patient or machine triggered and machine cycled). Pressure Controlled Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation — (PC-IMV) Mechanical ventilation with preset inspiratory pressure and inspiratory time. Spontaneous breaths (i.e., inspiration is patient triggered and patient cycled) can exist between mandatory breaths. Continuous Spontaneous Ventilation — CSV is any mode of mechanical ventilation where every breath is spontaneous (i.e., patient triggered and patient cycled). Mandatory Breath is a breath type during mechanical ventilation for which inspiration is machine triggered and/or machine cycled. Spontaneous Breaths are a breath type for which inspiration is both patient triggered and patient cycled. Applies to assisted or unassisted breathing. Assisted Ventilation or assisted breath references ventilation (or breath) for which a machine provides some or all of the work of breathing. Patient triggered breath — A breath that is initiated by the patient, independent of ventilator settings for frequency. Autotriggering — Autotriggering is the unintended initiation of breath delivery by the ventilator, e.g., by an external disturbance such as movement of the breathing tube or an inappropriate trigger sensitivity setting. The following are terms that are included in modes of mechanical ventilation but are not yet included in the standardized nomenclature. 
