 NORM-UK is a British-based charity concerned with foreskin health and matters related to circumcision. It provides information about conservative treatments for foreskin problems including phimosis, non-surgical foreskin restoration, and hosts and participates in conferences about genital health. NORM-UK was founded in 1994 by English physician Dr. John Warren. The original aim was to provide information about non-surgical male foreskin restoration. The organization quickly expanded its mission to provide information about all aspects of health related to the foreskin, penis, and human genitals. NORM-UK is independent of any other organization and regulated by the Charity Commission for England and Wales. It is registered with charity number 1072831 and with the stated objective "To advance the education of the public in all matters relating to circumcision and other forms of surgical alteration of the genitals including alternative treatments and offering information and advice on such matters." Female circumcision, or female genital mutilation, which is illegal to perform on women in the United Kingdom, is also a concern of NORM-UK. NORM-UK publishes a quarterly journal, NORM NEWS: The Journal of NORM-UK. The charity also publish a number of pamphlets including Care of the Intact Infant Penis, Phimosis, Foreskin Tightness, and Alternatives to Circumcision. NORM-UK's Dr. Peter Ball also produced the video and DVD Restoration in Focus. NORM-UK co-operates with many other non-profit organizations and is currently a member of the Alliance for Transforming the Lives of Children and the International Coalition for Genital Integrity. The charity's website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation (HON), a Swiss-based NGO. The organization's office is located in Stone, Staffordshire, United Kingdom. David Smith serves as general manager and is the charity's only paid employee. There are also a number of volunteers who work in the office and remotely. The board of trustees includes: Dr, John Warren MB, DCH, FRCP (Chairman); Dr. Peter Ball MB,B Chir (Vice Chairman); Margaret Green (Treasurer); and John Dalton Bsc, Msc (Lead Researcher and Archivist). Film and TV star Alan Cumming, art critic and writer Brian Sewell, and scientist Jack Cohen are all patrons of NORM-UK. 
