 The Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences is located in Tulsa, in the U.S. state of Oklahoma and is part of the Oklahoma State University System. The Center founded by the Oklahoma State Legislature in 1972 (to provide care to rural areas) and merged with OSU in 1988. The University's College of Osteopathic Medicine is consistently ranked by [[U.S. News & World Report]] as being among the best medical schools in the country. In 2013, the [[U.S. News & World Report]] ranked Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences 84th nationally in the field of primary care. OSU Center for Health Sciences educates and trains osteopathic physicians, research scientists, and other health care professionals with emphasis on serving rural and underserved Oklahoma. In the spring of 2006, the College of Osteopathic Medicine signed an academic affiliation agreement with Tulsa Regional Medical Center to create a permanent teaching hospital for Oklahoma State students. As of November 2, 2006, Tulsa Regional Medical Center was rechristened as the Oklahoma State University Medical Center, as per the terms of the 50-year agreement. Oklahoma legislators appropriated $40 million in funding towards improving the hospital's technology and facilities. Among the expected improvements are an expansion of the intensive care unit and renovations to the women's health and neonatal intensive care unit programs. OSU Medical Center is the largest osteopathic teaching center in the United States, training 165 resident physicians in primary and sub-specialty care each year. The Center for Health Sciences gained notoriety in recent years for its efforts in researching the mysterious and controversial condition known as Morgellons, for which there is no known etiology or treatment. Dr. Edward Goljan is the most well-known faculty member at the school. He is the professor and chair of pathology, and is nationally recognized as an expert educator in medical board exam preparation. Dr. Goljan is author of the popular "Rapid Review" book for pathology, and audio files of his lectures are used by medical students around the country. The school offers the following degree programs: 
