 While many senior citizens are safe drivers, and in fact can be among the safest drivers on the road, statistics show that a driver older than age 75 is just as likely as a teenager to be involved in an automobile accident.[[Template:dead link]] According to the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, a senior citizen is more likely than a younger driver to be at fault in an accident in which they are involved. The most common violations include failure to obey traffic signals, unsafe turns and passing, and failure to yield the right of way. Often, descendants of an elderly person are faced with the responsibility of trying to get them (the elderly person) to give up driving. This can be challenging because senior citizens often put their interests ahead of those of their communities, and most become cranky and intransigent when asked to give up their keys. The law in most places allows senior citizens to keep on driving provided they meet the same requirements as younger adults. Some places require persons above a specified age to take certain tests when renewing their licenses, up to and including a road test, or to receive a physician's certificate stating they are medically fit to operate a motor vehicle. Some senior citizens may continue to be permitted to drive, but with limitations, such as the amount of driving they can do, the hours in which they can drive, or the distance from home they can travel. These restrictions may be placed either by the law or their insurance provider. Also at issue is determining exactly what age is considered too old to drive. As the process of aging varies from one person to the next, the age at which an elderly person's ability to safely operate a motor vehicle declines varies between persons. This creates controversy in regulating driving in the elderly. Senior citizens are seen by some as among the safest drivers on the road, as they generally do not speed or take risks, and they are more likely to wear seatbelts. There are various reasons why an older person may experience a decreased ability to drive safely. In some elderly people, senses vital to safe driving, such as vision and hearing, decrease to the point that driving safety is compromised. Those whose vision is impaired may continue to be able to drive safely during daylight, but may have difficulty driving at night. In some persons, corrective lenses may improve the ability of the individual to safely operate a motor vehicle. Others have decreased physical abilities, such as gross and fine motor skills and reflexes, thereby rendering the driver physically unable to perform at a safe level. These partly explain why an elderly motorist may drive more slowly. Those whose physical abilities have declined may have difficulty operating the steering or pedals of a vehicle as needed, and therefore may not be able to maneuver the vehicle safely. Reduced cognition from mental conditions associated with old age, such as Parkinson's Disease, Alzheimer's Disease, and dementia can also impair driving. The following are considered sign that an elderly person's driving may be impaired: Aging individuals should consider the following questions: The number of older drivers on the road is growing and bound to increase at a more rapid rate, as more baby boomers become seniors. According to an AARP spokeswoman, by 2030 over 78 million boomers will be 65+, and research shows that men will outlive their driving abilities by six years and women by 10. The operation of a private vehicle is essential to life in many places, especially to one's independence. After the loss of their license, an elderly person may be forced to make major lifestyle changes. Where available, some senior citizens may turn to public transportation or paratransit . Where no public transportation is available, or if the individual does not feel comfortable with public transit, one may seek rides from others, such as family members. Though individuals can find alternative means of transportation, these alternatives may be more limiting than one's own car. Because giving up driving is viewed by the elderly as a loss of their independence, many may be reluctant to seek out alternative forms of transportation when they are no longer able to drive. The best way for transit providers to meet the transportation needs of most older Americans is to meet the transportation needs of the general adult population. Their needs are similar to other age groups: shopping, getting to work, medical appointments, going to restaurants and visiting friends. The National Center on Senior Transportation (NCST) states that 83% of older Americans agree that public transit provides easy access to the things that they need in everyday life. The Beverly Foundation developed these five aspects to greater encompass the necessary requirements to create a senior-friendly transportation alternative:<ref name="Beverly">http://beverlyfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/Fact-Sheet-5-the-5-as.pdf 
