 In UK health care, Office of Population Censuses and Surveys Classification of Interventions and Procedures (OPCS-4) is a procedural classification for the coding of operations, procedures and interventions performed during in-patient stays, day case surgery and some out-patient attendances in the National Health Service (NHS). Though the code structure is different, as a code set, OPCS-4 is comparable to the American Medical Association's Current Procedural Terminology. OPCS-4 is split into two volumes; a tabular list (Volume I) and an alphabetical index (Volume II). An electronic version is also available. The first NHS procedural classification was published in 1987, by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys as the Classification of Surgical Operations. In 1992 the 4th revision was released as the OPCS Classification of Surgical Operations and Procedures (4th revision) (OPCS-4.2). Responsibility for the classifications used in the NHS, including OPCS-4, passed to the NHS Information Authority (NHS IA) when it formed in 1999. By 2003, the NHS IA had realised OPCS-4.2 no longer accurately reflected many of the procedures being performed in the modern healthcare system. As a medium term measure, a project to replace OPCS-4 with a more robust method of procedure coding was proposed and partially developed. Rather than using a sequence of codes to capture activity, the new classification would have used a single alphanumeric code up to 15 characters long. When the NHS IA was superseded by NHS Connecting for Health (NHS CFH) in 2005, the project was placed on indefinite hold, and a program of annual revisions to OPCS-4 was implemented. Much of the development work for the redundant project was reused to produce the initial expansion and enhancement of OPCS-4.2 to OPCS-4.3. However, OPCS-4.2 remained the mandated method of procedural classification in the NHS setting until March 2006. Since the implementation of OPCS-4.3 in April 2006 there have been three further revisions to OPCS-4. Each becoming the mandated classification on 1 April in the year of publication. OPCS-4 version mandated for use (financial year) Whilst additions to OPCS-4 are reviewed on an annual basis, the long term plan remains to replace OPCS-4 with SNOMED CT. On 31 March 2013 NHS CFH ceased to exist. Since 1 April 2013, responsibility for revision and maintenance of OPCS-4 has been with Health and Social Care Information Centre (HSCIC). OPCS-4 is an alphanumeric nomenclature, with a 4 character code system similar to that found in ICD-10. The differences being that OPCS-4 classifies procedures and interventions, rather than diagnoses, and that the chapters do not correlate (i.e. Chapter A of OPCS does not classify treatments for conditions in Chapter I of ICD-10). The first character is always a letter. Second, third and fourth characters are always numbers. A . separates the third and fourth characters; for example Syntax of an OPCS-4 code 1st character 2nd character 3rd character 4th character A 0 1 .1 There are currently 24 chapters in Volume I of OPCS-4: There is currently no Chapter I. Nor are there any codes beginning with an "I". Whilst there is no Chapter O, codes beginning with an "O" can be found in OPCS-4. These were added to chapters when all the available 3-character code blocks were exhausted, but further classifications were needed. They are also referred to as "overflow codes", and are located at the end of the related chapter. When indexing a procedure or intervention that is classified to an O code, the letter denoting the chapter the code is found in is given in parentheses after the code. As an NHS publication, OPCS-4 is covered by Crown Copyright. There are a number of publications that supplement the tabular and index publications. The OPCS-4.6 Clinical Coding Instruction Manual is a reference book on how to use OPCS-4 to national standards. It is initially supplied to novice coders who attend a foundation course run by an Approved Trainer. Whilst each revision to OPCS-4 sees the issue of a new manual, updates are issued electronically, and the the onus is on coders to update them by hand. The Coding Clinic publication is how minor changes and coding advice for both ICD-10 and OPCS-4 are disseminated through the UK clinical coding community. Initially issued as a printed newsletter, in 2012 NHS CFH switched to a single, compendium-like electronic publication. Maintained by the DH Payment by Results team, the High Cost Drugs List is a catalogue of drugs licensed for use in the NHS that are excluded from the Payment by Results tariff. Issued annually - even in years with no revision to OPCS-4 - the list consists of the generic name of drugs next to its OPCS-4 code. The guidance section of the list states that it is down to the clinical staff to use the generic instead of brand names. The Chemotherapy Regimens List, also issued by the DH Payment by Results team, is for the coding of administration of antineoplastic drugs. Organised alphabetically, the list contains adult and paediatric chemotherapy regimens used in the NHS. Trials are excluded as they are usually financed by the pharmaceutical companies running the trial. 
