 The Order of Malta Ambulance Corps is a voluntary ambulance and first aid organisation operating in Ireland. The Order of Malta is engaged in teaching first aid, providing ambulance cover at large events, patient transport, community and nursing services. The Order of Malta has 4,000 volunteers throughout the Island of Ireland. The ambulance corps is administered by the Order of Malta. The National Director of the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps is Aidan O Brien, DM. In common with all members of the Ambulance Corps, Aidan is a volunteer. He is assisted by a Deputy Director, Cmdr John Wright,KM, and Assistant Directors, John Walsh, John Medley KM, Asst Cmdr Kevin Moore KM, Cmdr Brian Coote, Cmdr Ray Carney, Chief of Nursing Jim Hanly, Chaplain Andrew O'Sullivan, a Chief Medical Officer, and a staff with responsibility for different areas of ambulance corps work. The President of the Irish Association of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta Sir Adrian FitzGerald KM, 6th Baronet, 24th Knight of Kerry. The first unit of the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps began in 1937, when Professor Conor O'Malley, a Galway Doctor was asked by the Marquis McSweeney, the then Chancellor of the Irish Association to recruit members to form an Ambulance Corps, aimed initially for Connaught only. Thirteen men were recruited by Professor O'Malley: six sixth year students from St. Josephs College "the Bish", Secondary School; four members from C.Y.M.S., Galway ; two Scout Masters; and one "lay" member. These thirteen members were the founder members of the ambulance corps in Galway . The new recruits were enrolled on a series of First Aid lectures, given by Professor O'Malley in the X-Ray Department of the Central Hospital . The bandaging was taught by Theatre Sister Mary Shaughnessy. Examinations in First Aid were held in January1938, and all were successful. In February 1938 First Aid services were requested for a National League match in Castlebar. The duties were allocated in Alphabetical Order- "Burke" and "Coogan" were first on duty. The first Officer in Charge of the Galway Unit was Sgt. Timothy Murphy. A second unit was set up in 1939 in Kilkenny. Since then the Corps has grown in strength providing first aid cover for many major sporting and cultural events and concerts. Today, the ambulance corps is committed to providing services in a Christian, caring and non-discriminatory environment, to "Our Lords, the poor and the sick". The ambulance corps is a national organisation with 5,346 members involved in 86 units across the Island of Ireland. For administration purposes, the country is divided into regions which are managed by regional directors. Each region consists of a number of units which deliver services at local level. The organisation operates over 165 ambulances, mobile accident and emergency suites, support vehicles, medical bikes and command centres. The organisations headquarters are located in St John's House Clyde Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4. Within the building there are modern lecture halls for training and a command and control centre to coordinate vehicles and personnel in the event of major incidents. Cadet Ranks (Ages 10–16) Adult Ranks (Ages 16+) Non-Commissioned Officers Ranks Commissioned Officers Ranks Volunteers wear epaulettes with a Maltese Cross while members holding a rank wear an epaulette with the Maltese Cross plus rank markings on the shoulders of the uniform. Different colour epaulettes are used to denote various medical qualifications and if a member is a member of the Catholic Clergy. The Uniform most commonly worn is the working uniform (2008) which consists of: Members may also wear a dress uniform on formal occasions. This consists of a military pattern tunic and trousers in grey, a white shirt and black tie and black shoes. A peaked cap is worn, the type depending on whether it is worn by an officer or other member. On certain occasions, male officers may wear a brown leather Sam Brown belt with brown leather gloves. The Order of Malta Ambulance Corps aims to have at least one unit based in every county in Ireland. The island of Ireland is divided into nine regions, each region administered by a Regional Director. The island of Ireland is divided into nine regions, each with an appointed Regional Director who reports directly to the Deputy National Director. The Regions are: 
