 :Osteopathic medicine in Canada refers to osteopathic physicians educated in the United States, receiving the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, who practise osteopathic medicine in Canada. Though licensure requirements for physicians varies by province in Canada, osteopathic physicians are generally able to obtain a license to practise medicine throughout the country. The Canadian Osteopathic Association is the largest association of osteopathic physicians in Canada. Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine (DOs) are educated in the United States and should not be confused with non-physician osteopaths. Currently, there are no colleges of osteopathic medicine in Canada. Only graduates of are eligible for licensure to practise Osteopathic Medicine in Canada. US-trained DOs may practise in Canada as fully licensed physicians. The authority for licensure of American osteopathic graduates lies with the provincial Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons. Province Scope of pracitise Requirements for Licensure Alberta Unlimited. LMCC, COMLEX, USMLE, accepted for licensure. British Columbia Unlimited. LMCC, COMLEX, USMLE, FLEX, NBME accepted for licensure. Manitoba Unlimited. US License recognized New Brunswick Unlimited. LMCC, COMLEX, accepted for licensure. DOs registered in Maine accepted for licensure. Newfoundland Unlimited. US License recognized NW Territories Unlimited. US License recognized Nova Scotia Unlimited. LMCC and COMLEX accepted for licensure. Ontario Unlimited. LMCC, COMLEX, and USMLE accepted for licensure. Prince Edward Island Pending. Quebec Unlimited. 1 year GME in Quebec & French fluency required. LMCC and COMLEX accepted for licensure Saskatchewan Pending. Yukon Territory Unlimited. US License recognized The Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine investigated the possibility of opening an osteopathic medical school in Canada. The plans have been dropped, due to concerns about clinical training in a country with very few D.O.s and the large time investment required to open the school. The college has opened a program at its existing osteopathic school that will accept 25 students from Canada each year. About 20 U.S.-trained osteopathic physicians are currently practicing in Canada. The Canadian Osteopathic Association recently started the Canadian Osteopathic Medical Student Organization. 
