 Osteo-odonto-keratoprosthesis (OOKP) (also known as "tooth in eye" surgery) is a medical procedure to restore vision in the most severe cases of corneal and ocular surface patients. It includes removal of a tooth from the patient or a donor. After this, a lamina of tissue cut from the tooth is drilled and the hole is fitted with optics. The lamina is grown in the patients' cheek for a period of months and then is implanted upon the eye. The procedure was pioneered by the Italian ophthalmic surgeon Professor Benedetto Strampelliin Rome in the early 1960s. The son of the geneticist and agronomist Nazareno Strampelli, Benedetto Strampelli held the chair of ophthalmic surgery at Rome's Ospedale di San Giovanni in Laterano where he was one of the first surgeons in Italy to transplant cornea. In 1953 he was the first Italian to implant IOLs which were manufactured to his own design by Rayners in UK. Strampelli was a founder-member with Harold Ridley and Peter Choyce of the International Intra-Ocular Implant Club (IIIC) in 1966. An operation to graft the OOKP is undertaken in severe pemphigoid, chemical burns, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, trachoma, Lyell syndrome and multiple corneal graft failure. There is a significant risk of anatomical failure of lamina in the long term, estimated at about 19% in a small study, with the main risks being laminar resorption, particularly in allografts, and glaucoma. Another, bigger study comparing OOKP with the lesser known osteo-keratoprosthesis (OKP) in 145 and 82 patients and follow-up terms up to 10 years yielded following statistics: with functional survival defined as best corrected visual acuity above 0.05. A long-term study of 181 patients puts the chances of retaining an intact OOKP after 18 years at 85%. OOKP is a complex two stage operation which was pioneered in Italy in 1963 by Professor Benedetto Strampelli. Stage 1 of the surgery involves 5 separate procedures: Stage 2 (about 4 months later) involves 2 separate procedures: At the end of the procedure, light can now enter through the plastic cylinder, and the patient is able to see through this cylinder with good vision. 
