 The Outcomes Research Consortium is an international clinical research group that focuses on the perioperative period (during and after surgery), along with critical care and pain management. The Consortium’s aim is to improve the quality of care for surgical, critical care, and chronic pain patients and to “Provide the evidence for evidence-based practice.” Members of the Consortium are especially interested in testing simple, low-risk, and inexpensive treatments that have the potential to markedly improve patients’ surgical experiences. The Outcomes Research Group was formed in 1990 at the University of California San Francisco. The Consortium now includes more than 100 university-based investigators at more than 20 hospitals in 10 countries. Its administrative center is the Department of Outcomes Research in the Anesthesiology Institute at the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland, Ohio, U.S. The Consortium coordinates more than 100 clinical trials, including large multi-center outcome studies. The results of these studies are disseminated in peer-reviewed medical journals and, with time, may be incorporated into medical practice. Since 2009 Consortium members published more than 125 full research papers, mostly related to anesthetic management. A long-standing interest of the Consortium is temperature regulation during and after surgery. Body temperature is normally tightly regulated to about 37 °C (98.6 °F), with women being slightly warmer than men. But anesthetic drugs profoundly impair normal control. Impaired temperature control, combined with a cold operating room environment, makes most unwarmed surgical patients hypothermic by 1-3 °C.Randomized trials have shown that just a 1-2 °C reduction in body temperature triples the risk of serious heart problems, triples the risk of wound infection, prolongs recovery and hospitalization, increases blood loss and transfusion requirement, and slows drug metabolism. Because hypothermia causes so many serious complications, The Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) and Physicians Quality Forum have each made perioperative normothermia an outcome measure for hospital quality. Consortium thermoregulatory research has been covered by the Cleveland Plain Dealer, the Philadelphia Inquirer, Reuters Health, and United Press International. 150 years after their discovery, how anesthetic gases work remains unknown. They work well in all mammals, rodents, insects, worms, fish, bacteria, and even plants. The dose required in various species doesn’t differ much from the dose in humans. In non-human species, there are distinct genetic characteristics that clearly influence anesthetic sensitivity. But until recently, no genetic factors were known to influence anesthetic requirement in humans. In a series of studies, Consortium members have shown that the effective dose of anesthetic gases is about 20% greater in natural redheads than in people with other hair colors. Red hair results from a mutation of the melanocortin-1 receptor. The Consortium’s results thus indicate that something about this receptor influences anesthetic action. Red hair was the first phenotype (physically apparent characteristics linked to a genetic mutation) linked to anesthetic requirement in humans, and remains the only one. Consortium research on red hair and anesthetic requirement has been covered by the San Francisco Examiner, The Globe and Mail, and Readers Digest.In further research, members of the Consortium found that redheads are resistant to local anesthetics. Consequently, they are more likely to suffer pain during dental procedures — and are therefore reluctant to receive needed dental care. Consortium research on red hair and dental avoidance has been covered by Macleans, the Boston Herald, and The New York Times. A study published by Consortium members in 2008 identified a strong association between the age of transfused blood and complications after cardiac surgery. Transfusion of red blood cells stored for more than two weeks also increased the risk of death after cardiac surgery by 30% — an increase that was still apparent more than two years after surgery. These results call into question current blood banking practices, and underscore the need to prevent deterioration of stored blood and improve blood donation and transfusion strategies. The group is currently conducting several studies of transfusion practices. Consortium transfusion research has been covered by the Boston Globe [Smith, Stephen (2008-03-20). "Older donated blood tied to heart surgery risk". Boston Globe. Retrieved 2009-02-10] and the Los Angeles Times [Maugh, Thomas (2008-03-20). "Older Blood Is Linked To Deaths"]. Major ongoing initiatives for the consortium include acute and chronic pain management, fluid management, control of the surgical stress response, and cardiovascular outcomes. A particular interest of the group is long-term outcomes of anesthetic management. While the effects of anesthesia have traditionally been considered to dissipate within hours of surgery, there is increasing evidence that anesthetic management may alter patient outcomes weeks, months, or even years after surgery. Site directors administer the most active Consortium affiliates at universities in Louisville, Dublin, Tel Aviv, Vienna, Melbourne, Tokyo, Buenos Aires, and Dallas. 
