 Overutilization (also unnecessary health care or unnecessary care) refers to medical services that are provided with a higher volume or cost than is appropriate. In the United States, where health care costs are the highest as a percentage of GDP, overutilization is the predominant factor in its expense. Factors that drive overutilization include paying health care providers more to do more (fee-for-service) and covering patients' costs by a third-party (public or private insurance) payer. These factors leave both doctors and patients with no incentive to restrain health care prices or use. Similarly, overtreatments are unnecessary medical interventions (therapies). They could be medical services for a condition that causes no symptoms and will go away on its own, or intensive treatments for a condition that could be remedied with very limited treatment. Overdiagnosis, when patients are given a diagnosis that will cause no symptoms or harm, can lead to overtreatment. In the 1970s and 1980s, Jack Wennberg's pioneering studies documented unwarranted variation, different rates of treatments based upon where people lived, not clinical rationale. When care is overused, patients are put at risk of complications unnecessarily, while health care providers (such as doctors and hospitals) receive revenue from the over-treatment when coupled to a fee-for-service (FFS) payment model; FFS is a large incentive for overutilization. In the United States, the country which spends the most on health care per person globally, overutilization is the most important contributor to the high cost. The New York Times reports that a "chronic overuse of medical care" exists in the United States. Unnecessary care, defined as services which show no demonstratable benefit to paitents, may represent 30% of U.S. medical care. Most physicians accept that laboratory tests are overused, but "it remains difficult to persuade them to consider the possibility that they, too, might be overutilizing laboratory tests". In the United States, overutilization is a costly expense that lowers the quality of health care. Fisher et al. demonstrated that "there is no apparent regional health benefit for Medicare recipients from doing more, whether 'more' is expressed as hospitalizations, surgical procedures, or consultations within the hospital". Up to 30% of Medicare spending may be cut without harming patients.Overuse of medical care in the United States is costing Americans billions of dollars every year.Gibson and Singh have documented harm to patients from overuse of surgeries and other treatments.. Factors that contribute to overutilization include "self-referral, patient wishes, inappropriate financially motivated factors, health system factors, industry, media, lack of awareness" and defensive medicine. When patients have their expenses covered by public or private insurance, and doctors are paid under a fee-for-service (FFS) model, neither have an incentive to consider the cost of treatment, a combination which contributes to waste. Atul Gawande investigated U.S. Medicare FFS reimbursements in the town of McAllen, Texas for a 2009 article in the New Yorker. McAllen, in 2006, was the second most expensive Medicare market, behind Miami. McAllen's costs, per beneficiary, were almost twice the national average. In 1992, however, McAllen was almost exactly in line with the Medicare spending average. After looking at other potential explanations such as relatively poorer health or medical malpractice, Gawande concluded that the town was a chief example of the overuse of medical services. Gawande concluded that it appeared a business culture (where physicans view their practices as a revenue stream) had established itself there, in contrast to a culture of low-cost high-quality medicine at the Mayo Clinic and in the Grand Junction, Colorado market. Gawande advised that The Canadian Association of Radiologists estimates that 30% of imaging is unnecessary in the Canadian health care system. Overutilization of diagnostic imaging, such as X-rays and CT scans, is defined as any application that is unlikely to improve patient care. Respected organizations—such as the American College of Radiology (ACR), Royal College of Radiology (RCR) and the World Health Organization (WHO)—have developed "appropriateness criteria". Overuse of imaging can lead to a diagnosis of a condition that would have otherwise remained irrelevant (overdiagnosis). One type of overutilization can be physician self-referral. Multiple studies have replicated the finding that when non-radiologists have an ownership interest in the fees generated by radiology equipment—and can self-refer—their utilization of imaging is unnecessarily higher. The majority of U.S. growth in imaging utilization (the fastest growing physician service) comes from self-referring non-radiologists. In 2004, this overutilization was estimated to contribute to $16 billion of annual U.S. health care costs. The 2010 U.S. health care reform, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, did not contain serious strategies to reduce overutilization; "the public has made it clear that it does not want to be told what medical care it can and cannot have". Uwe Reinhardt, a health economist at Princeton, said "the minute you attack overutilization you will be called a Nazi before the day is out". Physicians are incentivized to order clinically unnecessary, or of little potential value, tests in order to protect themselves from prosecution. While defensive medicine is a favored explanation for high medical costs by physicians, it was estimated to only contribute to 2.4% of the total $2.3 trillion of U.S. health care spending in 2008. 
