 <big></big> Pacific Northwest University of Health Sciences (PNWU) is an accredited private, non-profit graduate school located in Yakima, Washington, United States. The university's inaugural program was the first new medical school to open in the Pacific Northwest in sixty years, and it confers the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) degree. The school was founded in 2005, accepted its first class in 2008 and graduated its first class in May, 2012. The university will be adding a Doctor of Psychology (Psy-D); a masters of clinical counseling or public health (MS); a physician assistant masters program (PA), and a transition program for registered nurses with 2-year degrees to pursue a 4-year bachelor's degree. The mission statement of the school is "...to train, educate and encourage scientific research for health professionals who will provide high-quality health care to all communities of the Pacific Northwest, particularly underserved populations." In 2005, the school was raising funds, and working towards securing land.The university’s main building, Butler-Haney Hall, was dedicated in 2008, and cost $13 million to build. The school opened for classes on August 2009. In 2009, the university received a $400,000 federal grant to expand the College of Allied Health Sciences. The first class of 69 medical students graduated from the Pacific Northwest University on May 12, 2012. The college of osteopathic medicine is accredited by the American Osteopathic Association's Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation. The inaugural class of 2012 in the College of Osteopathic Medicine was made up of 75 students. Students perform two years of didactic training, where they focus on basic sciences, followed by two years of clinical rotations in off-site communities. Pre-requisites for the program include: The school currently has 18 sites for clinical rotations over the five-state region of Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington. Rather than all of the students receiving their clinical training in Yakima, students are required to go to many parts of the Northwestern United States to receive hands-on training, often near to their homes. These sites include Fairbanks, Alaska; Blackfoot, Idaho; and Portland, Oregon among 15 others. The campus consists of two buildings. Butler-Haney Hall is the center of the school where instruction and training occur, as well as housing the College of Osteopathic Medicine's Library. A new addition to Butler-Haney Hall will be completed in 2013. Cadwell Center opened in January 2011, and provides additional rooms for study, classroom and research space. 
