 A paramedic in Australia is a health care professional who responds to and treats all types of medical and trauma emergencies outside of a hospital setting before and during transportation to an appropriate medical facility. Paramedics also work in the inter-facility transport environment where a paramedic will continue or upgrade medical care to a higher level while transporting a patient from one healthcare facility to another. Paramedics are able to treat patients in the pre-hospital setting, and can transport them to a hospital-based emergency department if deemed necessary. In Australia, use of the term "paramedic" is not restricted, registered or licensed. There are currently substantial efforts in Australia to change this situation, most notably through Paramedics Australasia. Prior to the 1990s most paramedics were known as "ambulance officers". The term Paramedic is not defined in Australian law, and definitions vary widely. One definition is: "A Paramedic is a specialist health care professional who responds to requests for assistance and attends people suffering acute health crises of any nature. Paramedics provide health assessment, initial diagnosis, design a treatment plan and manage the patient’s crisis. The Paramedic may provide adequate treatment that may resolve the crisis and may or may not refer the patient onto another health professional. The Paramedic may continue treatment and provide patient transfer to an appropriate health care facility for ongoing referral and patient care." The Australian government indirectly regulates Paramedic training by means of a series of Nationally Recognised numbered certificates, intended to provide a relatively common level of competencies. Regardless, local standards are regulated by State Governments, and standards and definitions of terms vary widely between States. Many individuals possessing Certificates I-III may work in industrial first aid, for commercial first aid companies, or as non-emergency transporters or emergency ambulance services (particularly as volunteers). Some people with these qualifications call themselves "Paramedics", and there is currently no law regulating the use of this term. Certificate IV is the basic life support level which is regarded as the minimum entry level for emergency work in most statutory ambulance services, although some ambulance services require much higher qualifications. A Certificate II in Emergency Medical Response is used by some organisations. The term is non-specific and unregulated, and is used by private first aid companies, volunteer organisations, workplaces and State ambulance services to describe many levels of advanced first aid training. Patient transport officers must, at a minimum, complete a course of training that will earn them a nationally recognised Certificate III in Non-Emergency Patient Transport. Again, the use of the term is unregulated. Generally speaking, the statutory ambulance services in Australia require training to a Certificate IV level as the entry level for basic life support providers. The one exception to this is the State of Queensland, which still permits entry at the Certificate I level, or at Certificate IV. Though in other states like Victoria a Diploma of Paramedical Science (Ambulance), is required to transport more acute patients. This is possible in either the state run ambulance service (AV), or in some of the private ambulance transport companies. Paramedics in Australia's statutory ambulance services are all educated to advanced life support Level (ALS), however the term is unregulated and St John Ambulance in Western Australia (who also run the statutory ambulance service) encourage the use of the term for lesser-qualified persons. The base qualification for a paramedic is a Diploma or Bachelor's degree (in Health Science, Paramedic Science, Emergency Health or Paramedicine) or a post Graduate Diploma (pre-Masters - for health professionals converting to paramedicine). Some paramedic degrees are dual, that is with another discipline, for example Bachelor of Paramedicine/Bachelor of Nursing. In some states, paramedics can still undergo an in-service (post employment) diploma or Advanced Diploma level of education. Post-employment training is slowly being phased out in most states of Australia. Victoria and South Australia have completely ceased all in-service education with other states gradually reducing post-employment training as the supply of Graduate Paramedics from Universities meets Industry demands. Generally and increasingly, the standard for entry into practice requires graduation from a university. Intensive care (IC) paramedics, or Mobile Intensive Care Ambulance (MICA) paramedics, have completed post-graduate education that allows them to have a primary role of supporting paramedics by providing in-field stabilisation and mobile intensive care. Graduates have completed a university-level post-graduate diploma in Intensive Care Paramedical Practice, Emergency Health (MICA Paramedic) or equivalent in addition to their base qualification and graduate (internship) program. Unlike educational programs in the United States, Canada and other countries, graduates from an Australian University degree in Paramedicine are not usually considered 'road ready' by statutory ambulance authorities. Although their academic credential is internationally recognized, in order to be a fully recognized paramedic, University graduates must complete an 'internship year' with an EMS agency. This can only be done once the graduate student has been hired by the EMS agency. Please note that these terms and qualifications vary slightly between states. These are the minimum qualifications, but some states require more advanced training to hold these positions. For example, in Victoria, "Ambulance Transport Attendants" (ATA) (who primarily work for non-emergency private companies) are now required to hold a Diploma, and the term "Ambulance Paramedic" (Victoria) can also be referred to as "Advanced Care Paramedic" (Queensland). In some locations, volunteer first responders are used by ambulance services to begin basic treatment before a paramedic arrives. Their training is a high standard of advanced first aid. In some states volunteer "Ambulance Officers" have similar training to First Responders. Patient transport officers (PTOs), or ambulance transport officers, provide non-emergency patient transport. PTOs provide a pre-booked, non-urgent service that includes home to hospital and hospital to hospital transfers. In some states, PTOs may occasionally be required to act as first responders to emergencies. This is usually limited to situations where it would take significantly longer for paramedics to arrive at the scene than a nearby patient transport crew, or where patients that are assessed to be low-risk and require a low level of care in transit. Also, as many patient transport ambulances carry a second stretcher, non-emergency ambulance officers can be utilised to assist emergency crews in incidents involving numerous casualties. This is the basic level of pre-hospital emergency care. These paramedics hold a Certificate IV Health Care (Ambulance) (previously known as Certificate IV in Emergency Care), or equivalent, and are trained in basic life support skills. Meanwhile, in Queensland, ambulance officers hold only Certificates I-IV in Basic Emergency Care. In Queensland, when entering the ambulance service, workers can enter at Certificate I Level and can work towards a new certification every year or, with the completion of a Bachelor degree in paramedics, can enter as a level V paramedic. Paramedics practice includes all components of the basic life support level and the further enhancement of IV canulation, drug therapy (oral, intramuscular injection (IM), intravenously (IV), narcotic pain relief, anti-emetics, cardiac arrest, respiratory drugs, etc.), fluid resuscitation, advanced airway management (usually a laryngeal mask airway [LMA], or endotracheal intubation and Cricothyroidotomy in Western Australia) and the maintenance of infusions. Paramedics perform extensive physical assessment, blood examinations (e.g. random glucose test), interpret electrocardiograms (ECG), SpO2, temperature, and provide care for a range of patients from the new born to the elderly. IC or MICA paramedics are able to practice intensive care procedures such as endotracheal intubation, surgical airways, rapid sequence intubation (RSI), nasotracheal intubation, chest tube insertion, and drug infusions (e.g. Adrenaline, Salbutamol, sedation, thrombolytics etc.). IC or MICA paramedics practice under clinical practice guidelines independently of medical control. The Council of Ambulance Authorities is currently lobbying for an expanded scope of practice to permit more primary care by advance care paramedics, including the role of paramedic as independent practitioner. Some ambulance services employ paramedics specially trained in rescue or special operations techniques. Officers can be trained in areas such as road crash rescue, vertical rescue, confined space and trench rescue. They learn navigation skills, four wheel driving, urban search and rescue, and chemical biological and radiological procedures. Retrieval or flight paramedics work on fixed wing and helicopter aircraft in many states, performing both emergency and routine transport operations. They are generally considered to be extremely highly trained in emergency medical care, but also aviation medicine, rescue and aviation emergencies. In some states this role is performed by a Flight Nurse or Flight Doctor with specialist qualifications in Intensive Care or Emergency Medicine who is then supported by a Flight Paramedic who is usually credentialed at IC or MICA level. Paramedics are employed by various public and private service providers. The state run ambulance services are activated by the 000 (or 112 for mobile phones) emergency number. Paramedics may respond to medical incidents in a conventional ambulance, sedan, 4WD, rescue vehicle, helicopter, fixed-wing aircraft, motorcycle or even bicycle or foot at large public gatherings. There are also private transport ambulances which are crewed by Patient Transport Officers (or sometimes Ambulance Attendants and/or nurses). They generally transport non-emergency patients between hospitals and other health settings such as nursing homes. In Australia paramedic salaries can range anywhere from unpaid volunteer positions to over $130,000 a year, depending on location, experience, supervisory responsibilities and overtime. Paramedics Australasia (PA) is the professional college for paramedics and ambulance personnel. Industrial representation varies from state to state, the paramedic unions in Australia include the Ambulance Employees of Australia (AEA) which represents paramedics from Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia. The [Health Services Union] is another in the industrial field. The Emergency Medical Services Protection Association (EMSPA) represents a new chapter in Legal and Industrial representation and protection for Paramedics and employees. EMSPA is a professional organisation representing nearly 2000 paramedics in New South Wales, Queensland, and Victoria in industrial and other work-related matters. Established in 2005 by Ambulance Officers seeking improved representation on employment-related matters this association has been extremely successful in representing the rights and entitlements of Ambulance Officers since its inception and as a result continues to grow in membership numbers. 
