 A paraneoplastic syndrome is a disease or symptom that is the consequence of the presence of cancer in the body, but is not due to the local presence of cancer cells. These phenomena are mediated by humoral factors (by hormones or cytokines) excreted by tumor cells or by an immune response against the tumor. Paraneoplastic syndromes are typical among middle aged to older patients, and they most commonly present with cancers of the lung, breast, ovaries or lymphatic system (a lymphoma). Sometimes the symptoms of paraneoplastic syndromes show before the diagnosis of a malignancy, which has been hypothesized to relate to the disease pathogenesis. In this paradigm, tumor cells express tissue-restricted antigens (such as neuronal proteins), triggering an anti-tumor immune response which may be partially or, rarely, completely effective in suppressing tumor growth and symptoms. Patients then come to clinical attention when this tumor immune response breaks immune tolerance and begins to attack the normal tissue expressing that (e.g. neuronal) protein. Paraneoplastic syndromes can be divided into four main categories: Endocrine, neurological, mucocutaneous and hematological paraneoplastic syndromes, as well as others that may not fit into any of the above categories: Syndrome class !! Syndrome !! Main causal cancers !! Causal mechanism Endocrine Cushing syndrome Ectopic ACTH and ACTH-like substance SIADH antidiuretic hormone Hypercalcemia PTHrP (Parathyroid hormone-related protein), TGF-α, TNF, IL-1 Hypoglycemia Insulin or insulin-like substance or "big" IGF-II Carcinoid syndrome Serotonin, bradykinin Polycythemia See hematological paraneoplastic syndromes Hyperaldosteronism Aldosterone Neurological Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) Immunologic Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration Encephalomyelitis inflammation of the brain and spinal cord Limbic encephalitis Brainstem encephalitis Paraneoplastic Opsoclonus (involving eye movement)-Myoclonus Autoimmune reaction against the RNA-binding protein Nova-1 Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis Autoimmune reaction against NMDA-receptor subunits Polymyositis Mucocutaneous Acanthosis nigricans Dermatomyositis Immunologic Leser-Trélat sign Necrolytic migratory erythema Glucagonoma Sweet's syndrome Florid cutaneous papillomatosis Pyoderma gangrenosum Acquired generalized hypertrichosis Hematological Granulocytosis G-CSF Polycythemia Erythropoietin Trousseau sign Mucins that activate clotting, others Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis Hypercoagulability Anemia Unknown Others Membranous glomerulonephritis Tumor-induced osteomalacia Stauffer syndrome Neoplastic fever A particularly devastating form of paraneoplastic syndromes is a group of disorders classified as paraneoplastic neurological disorders (PNDs). These paraneoplastic disorders affect the central or peripheral nervous system; some are degenerative, though others (such as LEMS) may improve with treatment of the condition or the tumour. Symptoms of paraneoplastic neurological disorders may include ataxia (difficulty with walking and balance), dizziness, nystagmus (rapid uncontrolled eye movements), difficulty swallowing, loss of muscle tone, loss of fine motor coordination, slurred speech, memory loss, vision problems, sleep disturbances, dementia, seizures, sensory loss in the limbs. The most common cancers associated with paraneoplastic neurological disorders are breast, ovarian and lung cancer, but many other cancers can produce paraneoplastic symptoms as well. Treatment options include: 
