 Paul Edward Farmer (born October 26, 1959) is best known for his humanitarian work providing "first world" health care for "third world" people, beginning in Haiti. Co-founder of international social justice and health organization Partners In Health (PIH), he is "the man who would cure the world" as made famous in the award-winning Mountains Beyond Mountains by Pulitzer-prize-winning author Tracy Kidder. He was appointed as United Nations Secretary-General's Special Adviser for Community-based Medicine and Lessons from Haiti on December 28, 2012. An American anthropologist and physician, he is currently the Kolokotrones University Professor at Harvard University, formerly the Presley Professor of Medical Anthropology in the Department of Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School, an attending physician and Chief of the Division of Global Health Equity at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts. In May 2009 he was named chairman of Harvard Medical School's Department of Global Health and Social Medicine, succeeding Jim Yong Kim, his longtime friend, collaborator, and, , President of the World Bank. On December 17, 2010, Harvard University's President, Drew Gilpin Faust, and the President and Fellows of Harvard College, named him a University Professor, the highest honor that the University can bestow on one of its faculty members. He currently resides in Kigali, Rwanda. He is board certified in Internal Medicine and Infectious Disease. He is editor-in-chief of Health and Human Rights Journal. In May 2009, Farmer was nominated to head the U.S. Agency for International Development, but the nomination was withdrawn. In August 2009, Paul Farmer was named United Nations Deputy Special Envoy to Haiti to assist in improving the economic and social conditions of the Caribbean nation. Farmer was born in North Adams, Massachusetts and raised in Weeki Wachee, Florida. He is a graduate of Hernando High School in Brooksville, Florida and was president of his senior class. He went on to attend Duke University as an Angier B. Duke Scholar, graduating summa cum laude with a Bachelor of Arts in medical anthropology. He then attended Harvard University, earning an MD and a PhD in medical anthropology. He and his wife, Didi, have two daughters, Catherine and Elizabeth, and one son, Sebastian. He currently lives in Kigali, Rwanda with his family. His younger brother, Jeff Farmer, also known as the nWo Sting, is a well-known athlete, competing on the professional wrestling circuit. In 1987, Farmer, along with Ophelia Dahl, Jim Yong Kim, Thomas J. White and Todd McCormack, co-founded Partners In Health. PIH began in Cange in the Central Plateau of Haiti and has developed into a worldwide health organization. The PIH hospital in Haiti provides free treatment to patients. PIH helps patients living in poverty to obtain effective drugs to treat tuberculosis and AIDS. In addition to his hospital in Haiti, Farmer oversees projects in Russia, Rwanda, Lesotho, Malawi and Peru. His approach has its basis in ethnographic analysis and real world practicality. Mountains Beyond Mountains: The Quest of Dr. Paul Farmer, a Man Who Would Cure the World' by Tracy Kidder details Farmer's work in Haiti, Peru, and Russia, as well as his efforts to balance clinical and academic responsibilities with having a family of his own. The book narrates the interactions and conflicts Farmer faces as he attempts to secure healthcare for the poor in Haiti. Paul Farmer sits on the board of the Aristide Foundation for democracy and is a co-founder and Board Member of the [[Institute for Justice & Democracy in Haiti]]. He is also a member of the Advisory Board of Incentives for Global Health, the NGO focused on developing the Health Impact Fund. Farmer was appointed as the Deputy UN Special Envoy for Haiti, by former US President Bill Clinton, UN Special Envoy for Haiti, on August 11, 2009. In this role, Dr. Farmer will support Clinton and assist in advancing their work on a day-to-day basis. Farmer is a board member of Kageno Worldwide, Inc., a community development agency that has worked in Kenya and Rwanda. Farmer has won honors including: {{Persondata | NAME = Farmer, Paul| ALTERNATIVE NAMES = Doktè Paul | SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = October 26, 1959| PLACE OF BIRTH = North Adams, Massachusetts | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
