 Pedorthist is the title of a professional who has specialized training to modify footwear and employ supportive devices to address conditions which affect the feet and lower limbs. They are trained in the assessment of lower limb anatomy and biomechanics, and the appropriate use of corrective footwear – including shoes, shoe modifications, foot orthoses and other pedorthic devices. In Canada, the practice of pedorthics is a self-regulated industry: Professional certification is voluntary.In the United States, there are a number of jurisdictions that require state licenses - see the State Licensure Map. Certified Pedorthist” is a title used by the American Board for Certification in Orthotics, Prosthetics and Pedorthics (ABC). International Certification. as well as the College of Pedorthics of Canada The professional designation of Certified Pedorthist is assigned to individuals who have completed the required training through education and clinic experience, and have passed the Pedorthic Certification exam. An individual who has met the above requirements must comply with mandatory continuing education program in order to maintain this certification. A certified pedorthist is obligated to support and conform to professional responsibilities that promote and assure the overall welfare of the patient and the integrity of the profession. Pedorthists consult with patients based on a referral from a prescribing healthcare professional such as a family physician, and are integrated members of health care teams. Certified Pedorthists work within a specific capacity detailed in their respective scope of practice documents. American Board for Certification in Orthotics, Prosthetics and Pedorthics (ABC) Scope of Practice and College of Pedorthics Scope of Practice. A Certified Pedorthist assists in: A Certified Pedorthist – C.Ped. or C.Ped (C) is a health professional who is trained to assess patients, formulate and implement a treatment plan and follow-up with patients.The services provided include, but are not limited to: Assessment Formulation of a treatment Implementation of the treatment plan Follow-up treatment plan 
