 The Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine (PCOM) is one of the oldest and largest osteopathic medical schools in the United States. Founded in 1899, it is home to over 1800 medical students as well as graduate-level students in several other fields of health care. The college stresses the importance of primary care in addition to many other specialities in medicine. In 2005, PCOM opened a second campus in Suwanee, Georgia. For more than a century, PCOM has trained physicians, health practitioners, and behavioral scientists. In the United States, there are two types of complete physicians: DOs and MDs. Both are fully qualified physicians, licensed to prescribe medication and perform surgery. DOs and MDs are alike in many ways, but receive additional training in the musculoskeletal system, take a more "holistic" approach to patient care, and may focus more on preventative health care. Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine has trained over 10,000 physicians, with more than 7,000 alumni currently practicing throughout the United States and in seven foreign countries. PCOM alumni practice in all areas of medicine, hold leadership positions in the medical community, teach in many of the country's top medical schools, and serve in every branch of the military. The Philadelphia College and Infirmary of Osteopathy (PCIO) was founded on January 24, 1899 by the Rev. Mason W. Pressly, D.O., and Oscar John Snyder, D.O. It was the third osteopathic medical school to open in the United States. In September 1899 the first PCIO degree was awarded, and in February 1900, the first PCIO "class," comprising one woman and one MD, graduated. PCIO was officially renamed to Philadelphia College of Osteopathy (PCO) in May 1921. PCO became the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine (PCOM) in May 1967. PCOM relocated to its current campus along City Avenue in Philadelphia in 1973 with the opening of Evans Hall. In 1979, PCOM acquired the adjacent office building and later named it Rowland Hall in honor of PCOM's 4th President. From 1995-1999, Evans Hall expanded to include a modern osteopathic manipulative medicine (OMM) Lab, more classrooms, a new cafeteria, and the Office of Admission. During the 1990s a series of new graduate level programs were added, expanding the scope of the medical school to a wide range of health-care related programs. In 1993, PCOM started the graduate program in biomedical science, offering graduate certificates and Master of Science degrees. The Doctor of Psychology was started in 1995. In 2005 the school expanded to Georgia with a new branch campus, which graduated its first D.O. class in 2009. Examples of student scholarship, College histories, yearbooks and special collections are housed in the Digital Commons@PCOM. PCOM is "dedicated to the education of students in medicine, health and behavioral sciences. The college fosters the growth of the osteopathic profession by training physicians through programs of study guided by osteopathic medical tradition, concept and practice." PCOM operates two campuses-one in Philadelphia and one outside Atlanta. The Philadelphia campus is 17 acres, and the Georgia campus is 20 acres. In 2005, Georgia Campus - PCOM enrolled its first class of osteopathic medical students. The Georgia Campus currently offers the doctor of osteopathic medicine degree, doctor of pharmacy degree and graduate programs in biomedical sciences. As a free-standing medical school, PCOM offers only graduate-level training. Degrees offered by the college include: <big>Philadelphia Campus:</big> <big>Georgia Campus:</big> In addition to its affiliation with several teaching hospitals, PCOM runs five primary care healthcare centers including: Sullivan County Medical Center, Roxborough Healthcare Center, Cambria Street Healthcare Center, Lancaster Avenue Healthcare Center, and City Avenue Healthcare Center. The clinics serve the dual purpose of providing community-based health care as well as providing educational experiences for medical students. Services include family medicine, gynecology, dermatology, geriatrics, psychology, and OMM. PCOM programs include a multi-hospital integrated approach. The total position numbers can vary with program directors' plans and implementation time frame. Most programs are in an expansionary growth phase. The mission of the Center for Chronic Disorders of Aging (CCDA) at Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine is to improve the quality of life for all individuals suffering from age-related chronic diseases and disorders. The CCDA promotes a better understanding of the nature of chronic disease processes by supporting basic and applied investigations, and providing educational opportunities for the community, scientists and health care professionals. The CCDA furthers its mission through an interdisciplinary approach combining scientific research, education, and clinical application into chronic diseases and disorders associated with the aging process. <div class="references-small"> 
