 Philip E. Stieg (born July 1952) is an American academic physician and neurosurgeon. Stieg was born in Milwaukee, WI, the third son of Betty and Edwin Stieg. He attended parochial schools for his primary and secondary education, and then enrolled at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (UW) in 1970. Stieg earned a B.S. degree in Zoology from UW in 1974. Philip pursued graduate studies in neuroanatomy & neuroscience at Albany Medical College/Union University, and was awarded a Ph.D. in 1980. He then attended medical school at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Milwaukee, completing his M.D. degree in 1983. Stieg was a resident in general surgery and neurosurgery at the University of Texas-Southwestern Medical School & Parkland Memorial Hospital, under the direction of Duke Samson and Hunt Batjer. Thereafter, he did a fellowship in cell transplantation for restorative neurological function at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden. Stieg joined the faculty of the Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Children's Hospital of Boston in Boston, MA in 1989, after completion of his postgraduate training. He developed research and clinical interests in cerebral protection and restorative function, neural transplantation, neuronal regeneration after stroke, cerebrovascular surgery, and surgery of the skull base. His investigative studies have focused on understanding the mechanisms of injury in the central nervous system after trauma, as well as mechanisms of cell-membrane transport and their implications after traumatic brain injury. In November 2000, Stieg was named Professor & Chair of the Department of Neurosurgery at Cornell-Weill Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York City. He has continued to be active in clinical practice, research, and medical education since then. Stieg is the recipient of several awards and honors, including citations in "Who's Who in Health and Medical Services" and "The Best Doctors in America". He has authored over 65 peer-reviewed publications in the medical literature, and he has co-edited a textbook entitled "Intracranial Arteriovenous Malformations".Intracranial Arteriovenous Malformations. Informa Healthcare, New York, NY, 2007. ISBN 0824709934 {{Persondata | NAME =Stieg, Philip | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION = American neuroscientist| DATE OF BIRTH = 1952| PLACE OF BIRTH =Milwaukee, Wisconsin | DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
