 Phyllis Cilento, Lady Cilento (13 March 189426 July 1987) was an Australian medical practitioner and journalist. Phyllis Dorothy McGlew was born on 13 March 1894 at Rockdale, Sydney, New South Wales, the daughter of Charles Thomas McGlew and Alice Lane (née Walker). She grew up in Adelaide, South Australia. She married Raphael Cilento, also a doctor, in Adelaide in 1920. They worked in a number of countries before settling in Brisbane, Queensland, in 1928. They had six children, including actress Diane Cilento, and remained married until Raphael's death in 1985. She died on 26 July 1987 in Brisbane and was buried in Albany Creek Cemetery. Phyllis Cilento studied medicine at the University of Adelaide, graduating in 1919. She worked for a short time at the Adelaide Hospital, the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London and the Marylebone Medical Mission Dispensary, and a brief stint in general practice in Adelaide. Following her marriage, the couple moved to the Malay States where she worked as a "lady medical officer" in the British colonial service and supervise a women's ward in a hospital. In 1922, Cilento studied a course in public health at the University of Sydney. From 1924 to 1927, she worked in private practice in New Guinea. Cilento worked in the Hospital for Sick Children in Brisbane from 1931–1938, after which she moved into general practice working from a surgery attached to her home in Annerley with a special interest in the health of mothers and children, including obstetrics. In 1967, she moved to Toowong, where she continued her practice until the early 1980s. Dr Cilento became well-known through her active advocacy of health issues for women and children. From 1928 onwards she wrote both occasional articles and regular columns for magazines and newspapers under the nom de plume of "Mother M.D." and "Medical Mother". She was particularly interested in promoting good nutrition and raising children. She expanded her outreach through books and radio, and was widely respected by women for her practical advice. She was a strong advocate of the benefit of vitamins. However, some of her advice was disliked by other doctors as she was ahead of her time in advocating natural childbirth, family planning and that fathers be present at the birth of their children. Dr Cilento was also active in medical organisations, including the inaugural president of the Queensland Medical Women's Society in 1929. She pursued her particular passion for mothers and children through the establishment in 1931 of the Mothercraft Association of Queensland in 1931, the Family Planning Association of Queensland, and her membership of Creche and Kindergarten Association of Queensland. She was also active in women's organisations, including the National Council of Women in Queensland, the Business and Professional Women's Association and the Lyceum Club. Some of her books include: In 1971 the Brisbane City Mission presented her with a citation signed by the Queensland Premier and many church and community organisations. In 1974 she was declared to be Queensland Mother of the Year. In 1977 her name was used for an award bestowed by the Nutritional Foods Association of Australia. The Lady Cilento Parenting Centre in Brisbane was named after her (her husband having been knighted). In 1979 she became a Fellow of the International Academy of Preventive Medicine.In 1980 she was awarded life membership of the Australian Medical Association.In 1981 she was named Queenslander of the Year.In 1987 she was named Queensland Senior Citizen of the Year and was awarded a medal of merit by the Australian chapter of the Legion of Frontiersmen of the Commonwealth.In 1982 she was named Loyal Australian of the Year by the Assembly of Captive European Nations. She is the subject of a number of portraits, one by John Rigby (1973) is held in the Queensland Art Gallery. {{Persondata | NAME = Cilento, Phyllis Dorothy| ALTERNATIVE NAMES = McGlew, Phyllis Dorothy| SHORT DESCRIPTION = Medical practitioner and journalist, specialising in health of mothers and children| DATE OF BIRTH = 13 March 1894 | PLACE OF BIRTH = Rockdale, New South Wales| DATE OF DEATH = 26 July 1987| PLACE OF DEATH = Brisbane, Queensland}} 
