 Plasma renin activity (PRA), also known as the renin (active) assay or random plasma renin, is a measure of the activity of the plasma enzyme renin, which plays a major role in the body's regulation of blood pressure, thirst, and urine output. PRA is sometimes measured, specially in case of certain diseases which present with hypertension or hypotension. PRA is also raised in certain tumors. A PRA measurement may be compared to a plasma aldosterone concentration as an aldosterone-to-renin ratio. Measurement is done from a sample of venous blood using immunological measuring mechanisms like ELISA, RIA, etc. Often these are done by automated machines to minimize human error. These values are quite variable in a normal person. Variation occur with the following: Reference ranges for blood tests of plasma renin activity can be given both in mass and in international units (μIU/mL or equivalently mIU/L, improperly shown as μU/mL or U/L, confusing mcU/mL used where Greek μ not available), with the former being roughly convertible to the latter by multiplying with 11.2. The following table gives the lower limit (2.5th percentile) and upper limit (97.5th percentile) for plasma renin activity by mass and MCU, with different values owing to various factors of variability of reference ranges: Unit !! Lower limit !! Upper limit ng/(mL*hour) || 0.29, Washington, Department of Laboratory Medicine. Retrieved Mars 2011 1.9 || 3.7 μIU/mL || 3.3, 21 Washington, Department of Laboratory Medicine. Retrieved Mars 2011 || 41 Please go through the physiology of renin and the renin-angiotensin system to understand why the following occur. Higher-than-normal levels may indicate: Disease !! Brief Description Addison's disease Kidneys trying to counter low aldosterone output. Cirrhosis of the liver Reduced breakdown of Angiotensin. Essential hypertension Just more of renin is being secreted by the kidneys. Hemorrhage (bleeding) Kidneys trying to raise falling blood pressure. Hypokalemia Kidneys trying to raise falling blood pressure due to reduced cardiac output. Malignant hypertension Excessive renin is being secreted by the kidneys. Renin-producing renal tumors Tumors can secrete substances like this. See tumor markers Renovascular hypertension Renal vascular damage leading to reduced JGA perfusion. Lower-than-normal levels may indicate: Disease !! Brief Description ADH therapy Leads to water retention and thus raised blood pressure. Salt-retaining steroid therapy see above Salt-sensitive essential hypertension see above Primary Hyperaldosteronsim see above and direct inhibition of aldosteron on renin secretion 
