 Poser criteria are diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis (MS). They replaced the older Schumacker criteria, and now they are considered obsolete as McDonald criteria have superseded them. Nevertheless, some of the concepts introduced have remained in MS research, like CDMS (clinical definite MS), and newer criteria are often calibrated against them. The article that introduced them also defined the concepts of attack, historical information, clinical evidence, paraclinical evidence, lesion typical of MS, remission, separate lesions and laboratory support, which are necessary to apply the criteria. The authors defined a set of rules that can yield five conclusions: CDMS, LSDMS, CPMS, LSPMS or noMS. Poser diagnosis of CDMS is known to have a sensitivity of 87% respect postmortem autopsy examination Poser et al. define several concepts. The most important for diagnosis are: The criteria can yield five conclusions:<ol style="list-style-type:upper-alpha"> </ol> Any of the five conclusions have subpossibilities. Here a table is shown with each one of them: Clinical Presentation Additional Data Needed CDMS * Two or more attacks (relapses) Two clinical evidence One clinical and one paraclinical evidence LSDMS * At least one attack and oligoclonal bands Two attacks and one evidence (clinical or paraclinical)One attack and two clinical evidencesOne attack, one clinical and one paraclinical evidences CPMS * At least one attack Two attacks and one clinical evidenceOne attack and two clinical evidencesOne attack, one clinical and one paraclinical evidences LSPMS * Two attacks No more evidence is required If none of these requirements is accomplished, the diagnosis is "No MS", meaning that there is not enough clinical evidence to support a clinical diagnosis of MS. Poser diagnosis of CDMS was initially reported to have a sensitivity of 87% respect postmortem autopsy examination. Poser criteria were published in 1983 and their sensitivity increased with time. For example, in 1988 a 94% specifity vs. postmortem analysis was reported As more knowledge about the underlying pathology of MS has been gathered, the concepts of subclinical, preclinical and CIS have been used together with the Poser original classification. The first manifestation of MS is the so-called clinically isolated syndrome, or CIS, which is the first isolated attack. The Poser diagnosis criteria for MS does not allow doctors normally to give an MS diagnosis until a second attack takes place. Therefore the concept of "clinical MS", for a MS that can be diagnosed is sometimes too strong because until MS diagnosis has been established, nobody can tell whether the disease dealing with is MS. Cases of MS before the CIS are sometimes found during other neurological inspections and are referred to as "subclinical MS". "Preclinical MS" refers to cases after the CIS but before the confirming second attack. After the second confirming attack the situation is referred to as CDMS (clinically defined multiple sclerosis). 
