 The posterior pituitary (or neurohypophysis) comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, per se; rather, it is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the anterior pituitary gland. It is where neurohypophysial hormones are stored and released. The posterior pituitary consists mainly of neuronal projections (axons) of magnocellular neurosecretory cells extending from the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. These axons store and release neurohypophysial hormones oxytocin and vasopressin into the neurohypohyseal capillaries, from there they get into the systemic circulation (and partly back to the hypophyseal portal system). In addition to axons, the posterior pituitary also contains pituicytes, specialized glial cells resembling astrocytes assisting in the storage and release of the hormones. Classification of the posterior pituitary varies, but most sources include the two regions below: The median eminence is only occasionally included as part of the posterior pituitary. Other sources specifically exclude it from the pituitary. A few sources include the pars intermedia as part of the posterior lobe, but this is a minority view. It is based upon the gross anatomical separation of the posterior and anterior pituitary along the cystic remnants of Rathke's pouch, causing the pars intermedia to remain attached to the neurohypophysis. Hormones known classically as posterior pituitary hormones are synthesized by the hypothalamus. They are then stored in neurosecretory vesicles regrouped into Herring bodies before being secreted by the posterior pituitary into the bloodstream. Hormone Other names Symbol(s) Main targets Effect Source Oxytocin Pitocin (trade name) OT Uterus, mammary glands Uterine contractions supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei Vasopressin Antidiuretic hormone, arginine vasopressin, argipressin VP, AVP, ADH Kidneys or Arterioles Stimulates water retention supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei Insufficient secretion of vasopressin underlies diabetes insipidus, a condition in which the body loses the capacity to concentrate urine. Affected individuals excrete as much as 20 liters of dilute urine per day. Oversecretion of vasopressin causes the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). 
