 Post-thrombotic syndrome (PTS, also called post-phlebitic syndrome and venous stress disorder) is the signs and symptoms that may occur as long-term complications of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). PTS can affect 23-60% of patients in the two years following DVT of the leg. Of those, 10% may go on to develop severe PTS, involving venous ulcers. PTS lowers patients' quality of life after DVT, specifically with regards to physical and psychological symptoms and limitations in daily activities. Secondly, the treatment of PTS adds significantly to the cost of treating DVT. The annual health care cost of PTS in the United States has been estimated at $200 million, with costs over $3800 per patient in the first year alone, and increasing with disease severity. PTS also causes lost work productivity: patients with severe PTS and venous ulcers lose up to 2 work days per year. Signs and symptoms of PTS in the leg may include: These signs and symptoms may vary among patients and over time. With PTS, these symptoms typically are worse after walking or standing for long periods of time and improve with resting or elevating the leg. When a physician finds a DVT in the past clinical history of their patient, a post-thrombotic syndrome will be possible if the patient has suggestive symptoms. A Lower limbs venous ultrasonography must be performed to evaluate the situation: the degree of obstruction by clots, the location of theses clots, the detection of deep and/or superficial venous insufficiency. Since signs and symptoms of DVT and PTS may be quite similar, a diagnosis of PTS should be delayed for 3–6 months after DVT diagnosis so that an appropriate diagnosis can be made. Despite ongoing research, the cause of PTS is not entirely clear. Inflammation is thought to play a role as well as damage to the venous valves from the thrombus itself. This valvular incompetence combined with persistent venous obstruction from thrombus increases the pressure in veins and capillaries. Venous hypertension induces a rupture of small superficial veins, subcutaneous hemorrhage and an increase of tissue permeability. That is manifested by pain, swelling, discoloration, and even ulceration. The following factors increase the risk of developing PTS: Prevention of PTS begins with prevention of initial and recurrent DVT. For hospitalized patients at high-risk of DVT, prevention methods may include early ambulation, use of compression stockings or electrostimulation devices, and/or anticoagulant medications. For patients who have already had a single DVT event, the best way to prevent a second DVT is appropriate anticoagulation therapy. A second prevention approach may be weight loss for those who are overweight or obese. Increased weight can put more stress and pressure on leg veins, and can predispose patients to developing PTS. Finally, some data suggest that the use of elastic compression stockings for up to 2 years post-DVT can be an effective method of PTS prevention, while some data suggest otherwise. Treatment options for PTS include proper leg elevation, compression therapy with elastic stockings or electrostimulation devices, herbal remedies (such as horse chestnut, rutosides, pentoxifylline), and wound care for leg ulcers. Compression bandages are useful to treat edemas. Patients with upper-extremity DVT may develop upper-extremity PTS, but the incidence is lower than that for lower-extremity PTS (15-25%). There are no established treatment or prevention methods, but patients with upper-extremity PTS may wear a compression sleeve for persistent symptoms. The field of PTS still holds many unanswered questions that are important targets for more research. Those include 
