 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is practised in 28 countries in western, eastern, and north-eastern Africa, in parts of Asia and the Middle East, and within some immigrant communities in Europe and North America, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The WHO defines the practice as "all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons." The WHO identifies four types of FGM: Amnesty International estimates that over 140 million women worldwide have been affected by some form of FGM, with over three million girls at risk every year. It is mainly practised in 28 African countries, in a band that stretches from Senegal in West Africa to Ethiopia on the east coast, as well as from Egypt in the north to Tanzania in the south. Egypt passed a law banning FGM in 2008. Senegal passed a law in January 1999 that made FGM illegal. In the Arabian peninsula, Types I and II FGM are usually performed, often referred to as "Sunna circumcision," especially among Afro-Arabs (ethnic groups of African descent are more likely to prefer infibulation). The practice occurs particularly in northern Saudi Arabia, southern Jordan, and northern Iraq (Kurdistan). In the Iraqi village of Hasira, a study found that 60 percent of the females reported having undergone FGM. There is also circumstantial evidence to suggest that FGM is practised in Syria. In Oman, a few communities still practice it, though experts believe the number is small and declining annually. In the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, it is practiced mainly among foreign workers from East Africa and the Nile Valley. A 2009 study suggested that FGM had virtually disappeared among the Negev Bedouin. The practice can also be found among a few ethnic groups in South America. In Indonesia, it is common in several districts; almost all are Type I or Type IV. Sometimes the procedures are merely symbolic, and no actual cutting is done. As a result of immigration, FGM has also spread to Europe, Australia, and the United States, with some families having their daughters undergo the procedure while on vacation overseas. As Western governments become more aware of FGM, legislation has come into effect in many countries to make the practice a criminal offense. In 2006, Khalid Adem became the first man in the United States to be prosecuted for circumcising his daughter. In July 2003 at its second summit, the African Union adopted the Maputo Protocol promoting women's rights including and to end FGM. It came into force in November 2005, and by December 2008, 25 member countries had ratified it. 
