 Pseudarthrosis (or "nonunions") is a fracture that has not united in the stipulated time in which such fractures usually unite and has no chance of union without intervention.There is movement of a bone at the location of a fracture resulting from inadequate healing of the fracture. U.S. FDA has set a time period of 9 months for fracture union in order to decide when an intervention is required to facilitate union. Pseudarthrosis can also result from a developmental failure. The Greek stem "pseudo-" means false and "arthrosis" means joint. Pseudarthrosis, then, is a false joint. In the case of a "non-union", a fracture that does not heal, this is often evidenced by the obliteration of the medullary cavity of a long bone at the site of the non union. This non union is not a true joint, and has no ligamentous support, but often has motion, and remodels into a rounded end that looks like a true joint. Judet and Judet, Muller, Weber and Cech, and others classified nonunions into two types according to the viability of the ends of the fragments:- Hypervascular nonunions and Avascular nonunions.Hypervascular nonunions are subdivided as: Avascular nonunions are subdivided as: Paley classified tibial nonunions based on clinical and roentgenographic characteristics as Type A (Bone loss of less than 1 cm) and Type B (Bone loss of more than 1 cm). Type A is subclassified as Type A:1 Lax type; Lax nonunion have limited mobility and usually some fixed deformity, Type A:2:1 stiff nonunion without deformity and Type A:2:2 stiff nonunion with a deformity. Type B subclassified as Type B:1 bony defect with no shortening, Type B:2 shortening with no gap and Type B:3 there is both gap and shortening. The point of movement can be treated with electrical stimulations that hopefully will trigger the bone cells to form the hydroxyapatite structure that keeps bones from bending too much. More recently, non-unions are treated by bone grafting, internal fixation, and external fixation, including a technique pioneered by Liizarov, used to compress the bones at the site of the fracture. Ilizarov originally used bicycle spokes. See Taylor Spatial Frame for a description of the modern apparatus. GraftingThis is using donor bone or autologous bone (harvested from the same person undergoing the surgery) as a stimulus to bone healing. The presence of the bone is thought to cause stem cells in the circulation and marrow to form cartilage, which then turns to bone, instead of a fibrous scar that forms to heal all other tissues of the body. Bone is the only tissue that can heal without a fibrous scar. FixationThe use of metal plates, pins, screws, and rods, that are screwed or driven into a bone, to stabilize the broken bone fragments. 
