 Rabeprazole is an antiulcer drug in the class of proton pump inhibitors. It was developed by Eisai Co. and is marketed by Janssen-Cilag as rabeprazole sodium under the brand names AcipHex (, referring to pH) in the US, Pariet in Europe, Brazil, Canada, Japan, Russia and Australia, and Razo, Parit and Orpro in India. Short-term treatment in healing and symptomatic relief of duodenal ulcers and erosive or ulcerative gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); maintaining healing and reducing relapse rates of heartburn symptoms in patients with GERD; treatment of daytime and nighttime heartburn and other symptoms associated with GERD; long-term treatment of pathological hypersecretory conditions, including Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and in combination with amoxicillin and clarithromycin to eradicate Helicobacter pylori. Rabeprazole adverse reactions/side effects include: Antacid preparations such as rabeprazole by suppressing acid mediated break down of proteins, leads to an elevated risk of developing food or drug allergies. This happens due to undigested proteins then passing into the gastrointestinal tract where sensitisation occurs. It is unclear whether this risk occurs with only long-term use or with short-term use as well. Rabeprazole decreases the concentration of ketoconazole in the plasma (in 33%), increases the concentration of digoxin (in 22%), and does not interact with liquid antacids. Rabeprazole is compatible with any medicine metabolized by the CYP450 (theophylline, warfarin, diazepam, phenytoin). Studies in mice and rats indicated the symptoms of acute toxicity due to overdose included: hypoactivity, labored respiration, convulsion, diarrhea, tremor, and coma. A study in dogs indicated that a dose of 2000mg/kg was not lethal. Rabeprazole as "CYRA" (Systopic Labs Pvt Ltd), "Elpizole" ([[Orchid Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals]]), "Elpizole -20" ([[Orchid Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals]]), Rablet (Lupin), Acigard (3D), AcipHex, Rabeloc, Pariet, Rabider (Duta Formulations) is supplied in: Rabeprazole is sold under the brand names Acigard, Cyra, Rabium, Esoon, Rabemac, Rabiloz, Razo, Rabifast and Rablet in India, and Zechin in Pakistan. 
