 Ramipril is an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, used to treat high blood pressure and congestive heart failure. It is marketed as Prilace by Arrow Pharmaceuticals in Australia, Ramipro by Westfield Pharma in the Philippines, Tritace by Sanofi-Aventis in Italy and and United States and Altace by King Pharmaceuticals in the United States, Ramitens by PharmaSwiss, Ampril by Krka in Slovenia, Corpril by Cemelog-BRS in Hungary, Piramil and Prilinda by Hemofarm in Serbia, by Lek in Poland and by Novartis in Bangladesh, and in Canada as Altace (Sonfi) and Ramipril (Pharmascience). Indications for its use include: Renovascular disease (impaired blood flow in the kidneys), severe renal impairment (especially in patients with one kidney or with bilateral renal artery stenosis), volume-depleted patients, history of angioedema while on an ACE inhibitor, pregnancy, hypotension. Serious allergic reactions to this drug are unlikely, but immediate medical attention must be sought if they occur. Symptoms of a serious allergic reaction include, but are not limited to a rash or swelling of the face, mouth, tongue, or throat. In extreme cases, ramipril may lead to potentially fatal liver problems. ACE inhibitors, as the name suggests, inhibit the actions of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), thereby lowering the production of angiotensin II and also decreasing the breakdown of bradykinin. The decrease in angiotensin II results in relaxation of arteriole smooth muscle leading to a decrease in total peripheral resistance, reducing blood pressure as the blood is pumped through widened vessels. Its effect on bradykinin is responsible for the dry cough side effect. Ramipril, a prodrug or precursor drug, is converted to the active metabolite (metabolic product) ramiprilat by liver esterase enzymes. Ramiprilat is mostly excreted by the kidneys. The half-life of ramiprilat is variable (3–16 hours), and is prolonged by heart and liver failure, as well as kidney failure. The compound was protected by which was assigned to Aventis on 29 October 1991. The patent was scheduled to expire on 29 October 2008. On 11 September 2007, in an appeal by the Indian company Lupin Ltd., the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed a district court trial verdict and found that Aventis's patent on ramipril was invalid for "obviousness" - opening this medicine to generic manufacturers. Ramipril is marketed in India under the brand names of Cardace, Zigpril, Ramistar and Zorem. The HOPE trial seemed to show ramipril possessed cardioprotective qualities which extended beyond its qualities as an antihypertensive. However, the HOPE trial and the interpretation of the results have been criticised. The AIRE trial showed a 27% reduction in mortality. Ramipril was found to have similar results as telmisartan, an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB). 
