 Rare lung cancers is a generic term referring to particularly uncommon histological variants of malignant neoplasms arising from the uncontrolled growth of genetically mutated cells in lung tissue. There is no universally accepted definition of a "rare disease" or "rare cancer". Lung cancer is an extremely heterogeneous family of malignant neoplasms, with over 50 different histological variants recognized in the 4th revision of the World Health Organization (WHO) typing system, currently the most widely used lung cancer classification scheme. Because these variants have differing genetic, biological, and clinical properties, including response to treatment, correct classification of lung cancer cases are necessary to assure that lung cancer patients receive optimum management. Approximately 98% of lung cancers are carcinoma, with the remainer being mainly tumors of mesenchymal cell, hematopoietic cell, or germ cell origin. Approximately 98% of lung cancers are carcinoma, which are tumors composed of malignant cells with epithelial characteristics. LCLC's are one of 8 major groups of lung carcinomas recognized in WHO-2004: Each of these major groups (with the exception of adenosquamous carcinoma) contain at least one recognized "subtype" or "variant" with the particular histological and cytological characteristics qualifying them as part of that group, but which also present specific differences considered important enough for them to be delineated as a separate "subentity". Of the 8 major groups of lung carcinoma, only 4 are traditionally considered "common" forms — adenocarcinoma of the lung, squamous cell lung carcinoma, small cell lung carcinoma, and large cell lung carcinoma, which comprise (respectively) about 35–40%, 25–30%, 15–20% and 5–10% of all malignant lung neoplasms in the U.S. Under this (arbitrary) criterion, the other four major groups of lung carcinomas — and by definition, any of their subtypes and variants — would be considered "rare lung cancers". Furthermore, all mesenchymal cell-derived, hematopoietic cell-derived, germ cell-derived, and other unclassified cell types occurring as primary lung malignancies would also be considered "rare lung cancers". 
