 A rash is a change of the skin which affects its color, appearance or texture. A rash may be localized in one part of the body, or affect all the skin. Rashes may cause the skin to change color, itch, become warm, bumpy, chapped, dry, cracked or blistered, swell and may be painful. The causes, and therefore treatments for rashes, vary widely. Diagnosis must take into account such things as the appearance of the rash, other symptoms, what the patient may have been exposed to, occupation, and occurrence in family members. The diagnosis may confirm any number of conditions. The presence of a rash may aid associated signs and symptoms are diagnostic of certain diseases. For example, the rash in measles is an erythematous, morbilliform, maculopapular rash that begins a few days after the fever starts. It classically starts at the head and spreads downwards. Common causes of rashes include: Uncommon causes: The causes of a rash are extremely broad, which may make the evaluation of a rash extremely difficult. An accurate evaluation by a provider may only be made in the context of a thorough history (What medication is the patient taking? What is the patient's occupation? Where has the patient been?) and complete physical examination. Points to note in the examination include: Skin disease !! Symptoms !! Usual area of body Acne Vulgaris Comedones, papules, pustules and nodules. Face, chest and back. Acne Rosacea Flushed appearance or redness. Cheeks, chin, forehead or nose. Boil Painful red bump or a cluster of painful red bumps Anywhere Cellulitis Red, tender and swollen areas of skin Around a cut, scrape or skin breach Insect bite Red and/or itchy bumps on the skin Anywhere and can be sprinked randomly Allergic reaction Irregular, raised or flat red sores that appeared after taking medicine/drugs or eating certain foods Anywhere Hives Bumps formed suddenly Anywhere but usually first noticed on face Seborrheic dermatitis Bumps and swelling Near glands Cradle Cap Dry, scaly skin Scalp of recently born babies Irritant contact dermatitis Red, itchy, scaly or oily rash Eyebrows, nose, edge of the scalp, point of contact with jewellery, perfume or clothing. Allergic Contact Dermatitis caused by poison ivy, poisen oak or sumac Red, itchy, scaly or oily rash Anywhere that came in contact with the irritant either directly or via transfer (e.g. from contaminated clothing.) Allergic purpura Small red dots on the skin, or larger, bruise-like spots that appeared after taking medicine Anywhere Pityriasis Rosea Started with a single scaly, red and slightly itchy spot, and within a few days, did large numbers of smaller patches of the rash, some red and/or others tan Chest and abdomen Dermatitis herpetiformis Intensely itchy rash with red bumps and blisters Elbows, knees, back or buttocks Erythema nodosum Large red bumps that seem to bruise and are tender to touch Anywhere Psoriasis White, scaly rash over red, flaky, irritated skin Elbows and knees Erythema multiforme Red, blotchy rash, with "target like" hives or sores. Anywhere Measles Red rash that is raised with a fever or sore throat. Usually starts first on the forehead and face and spreads downward. Chickenpox Multiple blisters with a fever, cough, aches, tiredness and sore throat. Usually starts first on the face, chest and back and spreads downward. Shingles Red blisters that are very painful and may crust Anywhere Fifth Disease Started as a fever and then developed a bright red rash Cheeks Warts Soft bumps forming that don't itch and have no other symptoms Anywhere Ringworm Bald spot on the scalp or a ring of itchy red skin Anywhere Syphilis Rash that is red but not itchy Palms of hands or soles of feet Jock itch, yeast infection or diaper rash Red itchy rash Groin Tinea versicolor Light coloured patches Anywhere Impetigo Crusted, tan-colored sores Near nose or lip Scabies Bite-like sores that itch and spread intensely Usually start on hands or feet and spread everywhere Rocky Mountain spotted fever A fine rash with a fever and headache Usually start on arms and legs including the hands and feet Lupus erythematosus A butterfly rash with achy joints Forehead and cheeks Jaundice or sign of hepatitis Yellowish Skin, whites of eyes and mouth Bruise Blue or black area after being hit Anywhere Actinic keratoses Scaly, pink, gray or tan patches or bumps Face, scalp or on the backs or the hands Keloid or hypertrophic scar Scar that has grown larger than expected Anywhere Lipoma Soft or rubbery growth Anywhere Milia Lots of white spots On the face of a baby Molluscum or contagiosum Small, firm, round bumps with pits in the center that may sit on tiny stalks Anywhere Scarlet Fever Becomes confluent and forms bright red lines in the skin creases of the neck, armpits and groins (Pastia's lines) Face, chest & back, whole body, armpits, inside elbows, groins Sebaceous cyst Bump with a white dome under the skin Scalp, nape of the neck or upper back Skin tag Soft, fleshy growth, lump or bump Face, neck, armpits or groin Xanthelasma Yellow area under the skin Under eyelids Melanoma Dark bump that may have started within a mole or blemish, or, a spot or mole that has changed in color, size, shape or is painful or itchy Anywhere Basal cell carcinoma Fleshy, growing mass Areas exposed to the sun Squamous cell carcinoma Unusual growth that is red, scaly or crusted Face, lip or chin Kaposi's sarcoma Dark or black raised spots on the skin that keep growing or have appeared recently Anywhere Erythema annulare centrifugum (EAC) Pink-red ring or bullseye marks Anywhere Treatment differs according to what rash a patient has been diagnosed with. Common rashes can be easily remedied using steroid topical creams (such as hydrocortisone) or non-steroidal treatments. Many of the medications are available over the counter in the United States. The problem with steroid topical creams i.e. hydrocortisone; is their inability to penetrate the skin through absorption and therefore not be effective in clearing up the affected area, thus rendering the hydrocortisone almost completely ineffective in but almost the most mild of cases. 
