 Professor Ray K Iles is the Deputy Dean for Research and Income Generation of the Faculty of Health, Social Care and Education, Anglia Ruskin University after being recruited by the head hunting company Carbon-Nfp. Up to October 2011 he was Associate Dean for Research in the School of Health & Social Sciences at Middlesex University, and also the Professor of Biomedical Science. He was headhunted to lead the new Biomedical Research group at Middlesex University in 2004, and was formerly head of the Williamson Laboratory for Molecular Oncology research at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. Professor Iles is an international expert in the field of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) research, particularly with reference to its use as a tumour marker. His most recent work on the use of a vaccine against hCG to treat patients with tumours that express it entered clinical trials in the USA in 2010.Formerly a regular contributor to Kumar and Clark's Clinical Medicine, in 2012, with Dr Suzanne Docherty, he published a new text book in Biomedical Science subtitled Essential Laboratory Medicine. Ray K Iles was born in Barnes, London, as Raymond Kruse. His father died in 1967; his and his brother's names were subsequently changed by deed poll to Kruse Iles to reflect their mother’s re-marriage. His genetic family traces back to immigration of Germans and Danes from Schleswig-Holstein to the UK and London in particular, at the time of the Schleswig-Holstein War of 1850 and Bismarck’s campaign to unite the German states in the Reich. The Kruses were cabinetmakers, settling in Huntley Street behind Tottenham Court Road. Ray (Kruse) Iles’s tracing of his German cabinet-making ancestors resulted in his discovery that the British Olympic Fencing competitor - Richard Kruse - was his direct cousin. This was confirmed by Y chromosome genetic marker testing and featured on the BBC Radio 4 programme Tracing Your Roots. {{Persondata |NAME = Iles, Ray K|ALTERNATIVE NAMES = Kruse, Raymond|SHORT DESCRIPTION = Medical researcher |DATE OF BIRTH = |PLACE OF BIRTH = Barnes, London |DATE OF DEATH = |PLACE OF DEATH = }} 
