 The Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP) is a basic biomedical research center, funded by the pharmaceutical company Boehringer Ingelheim, and by national and European research grants. The institute is located on the Campus Vienna Biocenter (VBC). The IMP's primary goal is to conduct innovative basic research in the molecular life sciences. All research results are published in peer-reviewed journals. Currently, the IMP employs around 250 people from 36 nations. Research at the IMP spans a wide range of topics, broadly organised into 4 themes: life at the molecular and cellular levels, information processing and storage in neural circuits, mechanisms of organismal development and disease, and interdisciplinary approaches that bring ideas and methods from other fields to bear on biological questions. The common goal in all of these areas is to elucidate the mechanisms and principles that underlie complex biological processes. Currently, the IMP is organized into 17 independent research groups, headed by four senior scientists, twelve junior group leaders, and one IMP fellow. The groups focus on the following topics: A number of core facilities provide scientific services to the members of the institute: An international PhD program is carried out jointly with the neighboring institutes IMBA, GMI and MFPL. Acceptance into the program is competitive and based on a formal selection procedure. There are two selections each year, deadlines are April 30 and November 15, respectively. In order to maintain its high standard of research, the IMP has installed a process of review and feedback. The Scientific Advisory Board (SAB), consisting of internationally recognized scientists, meets once a year and discusses the quality, significance, and main focus of research conducted at the IMP. The foundation of the institute was promoted by the private company Boehringer Ingelheim, intending to branch into biotechnology, and the American partner Genentech, the number one biotechnology firm at the time. From the collaboration of both firms rose the idea of founding an independent basic research institute in Europe which resulted in the establishment of the actual Research Institute of Molecular Pathology in 1988 in Vienna (Austria) under the direction of Max Birnstiel. The institute opened its doors in 1988. The success of the IMP was promptly reflected in the expansion of biotechnology facilities near the institute. Three institutes of the Faculties of Science and Medicine of the University of Vienna moved into the building next door, and have been restructured as the Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL) under the directorship of Graham Warren. In 1993, Genenetech bowed out of its commitment with the IMP and Boehringer Ingelheim become the sole sponsor of the institute, with support from the Austrian Government. The campus has also been enriched by two institutes of the Austrian Academy of Sciences: the Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, directed by Josef Penninger, and the Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI), directed by Magnus Nordborg. Kim Nasmyth succeeded Max Birnstiel as director in 1997, after Max Birnstiel retired. Barry Dickson followed in 2006 and stepped down at the end of 2012. Currently, Jan-Michael Peters is acting director of the IMP. The operating budget of the IMP is provided largely by Boehringer Ingelheim. Additional support comes from grants awarded to individual scientists and projects by national and international funding agencies such as the Austrian Science Fund (FWF), Austrian Industrial Research Promotion Fund (FFG), the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF), Zentrum für Innovation und Technologie (ZIT), the City of Vienna, the Austrian federal government, the Human Frontier Science Program (HFSP), and the European Union (EU). From the initial planned staff of less than 100 employees, and due to its rapid success, the IMP has grown to its current size of over 250 employees working at the institute. The IMP attracts researchers from all over the world and today 36 nationalities are represented in the institute. There is a constant turnover due to the limited contracts of most researchers. 
