 Willis-Ekbom disease (WED), commonly known as Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS), is a neurological disorder characterized by an irresistible urge to move one's body to stop uncomfortable or odd sensations. It most commonly affects the legs, but can affect the arms, torso, head, and even phantom limbs. Moving the affected body part modulates the sensations, providing temporary relief. WED/RLS sensations range from pain or an aching in the muscles, to "an itch you can't scratch", an unpleasant "tickle that won't stop", or even a "crawling" feeling. The sensations typically begin or intensify during quiet wakefulness, such as when relaxing, reading, studying, or trying to sleep. Additionally, most individuals with WED/RLS suffer from periodic limb movement disorder (limbs jerking during sleep), which is an objective physiologic marker of the disorder and is associated with sleep disruption. Some controversy surrounds the marketing of drug treatments for WED/RLS. It is a "spectrum" disease with some people experiencing only a minor annoyance and others suffering major disruption of sleep and significant impairments in quality of life. The sensations—and the need to move—may return immediately after ceasing movement or at a later time. WED/RLS may start at any age, including childhood, and is a progressive disease for some, while the symptoms may remit in others. In a survey among members of the Willis-Ekbom Disease Foundation, it was found that up to 45% of patients had their first symptoms before the age of 20 years. In 2003, a National Institutes of Health (NIH) panel modified their criteria to include the following: WED/RLS is categorized as either primary or secondary. Most research on the disease mechanism of Willis-Ekbom Disease/restless legs syndrome has focused on the dopamine and iron system. These hypotheses are based on the observation that iron and levodopa, a pro-drug of dopamine that can cross the blood–brain barrier and is metabolized in the brain into dopamine (as well as other mono-amine neurotransmitters of the catecholamine class) can be used to treat RLS, levodopa being a medicine for treating hypodopaminergic (low dopamine) conditions such as Parkinson's disease, and also on findings from functional brain imaging (such as positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging), autopsy series and animal experiments. Differences in dopamine- and iron-related markers have also been demonstrated in the cerebrospinal fluid of individuals with RLS. A connection between these two systems is demonstrated by the finding of low iron levels in the substantia nigra of RLS patients, although other areas may also be involved. The most commonly associated medical condition is iron deficiency (specifically blood ferritin below 50 µg/L), which accounts for 20% of all cases of WED/RLS. A study published in 2007 noted that WED/RLS features were observed in 34% of patients having iron deficiency as against 6% of controls. Conversely, 75% of individuals with RLS symptoms may have increased iron stores. Other associated conditions include varicose vein or venous reflux, folate deficiency, magnesium deficiency, fibromyalgia, sleep apnea, uremia, diabetes, thyroid disease, peripheral neuropathy, Parkinson's disease and certain auto-immune disorders such as Sjögren's syndrome, celiac disease, and rheumatoid arthritis. RLS can also worsen in pregnancy. In a 2007 study, RLS was detected in 36% of patients attending a phlebology (vein disease) clinic, compared to 18% in a control group. An association has been observed between ADHD, and WED/RLS or periodic limb movement disorder. Both conditions appear to have links to dysfunctions related to the neurotransmitter dopamine, and common medications for both conditions among other systems, affect dopamine levels in the brain. A 2005 study suggested that up to 44% of ADHD sufferers had comorbid (i.e. coexisting) RLS, and up to 26% of RLS sufferers had confirmed ADHD or symptoms of the condition. A 2009 study updated this to report that 39% of RLS sufferers also might have ADHD compared to 14% of controls and that those showing signs of both had more severe RLS, suggesting that perhaps either the difficulties of WED/RLS and low sleep quality caused ADHD-like distraction or that dopamine was a possible common factor and its improvement helped both, and that RLS sufferers might wish to consider ADHD testing as well, but cautioned that neither condition was proven as the cause of the other. Certain medications may cause or worsen WED/RLS, or cause it secondarily, including: Both primary and secondary WED/RLS can be worsened by surgery of any kind; however, back surgery or injury can be associated with causing RLS. Withdrawal from opiates can cause WED/RLS at night ranging in discomfort between a feeling of numbness in the muscle and/or bones to feelings of pain and burning, similar to that which can be noticed after exercise due to buildup of lactic acid in the muscles. Some believe the movement and/or pain may itself cause a minor release of endorphins, helping one rest—albeit for short periods—by reducing adrenaline levels and inducing natural post exercise sedation. The cause vs. effect of certain conditions and behaviors observed in some patients (ex. excess weight, lack of exercise, depression or other mental illnesses) is not well established. Loss of sleep due to WED/RLS could cause the conditions, or medication used to treat a condition could cause WED/RLS. More than 60% of cases of WED/RLS are familial and are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with variable penetrance. No one knows the exact cause of WED/RLS. Research and brain autopsies have implicated both dopaminergic system and iron insufficiency in the substantia nigra (study published in Neurology, 2003). Iron is an essential cofactor for the formation of L-dopa, the precursor of dopamine. Six genetic loci found by linkage are known and listed below. Other than the first one, the remainder of the linkage loci were discovered using an autosomal dominant model of inheritance. Three genes, MEIS1, BTBD9 and MAP2K5, were found to be associated to WED/RLS.Their role in RLS pathogenesis is still unclear. More recently, a fourth gene, PTPRD was found to be associated to RLS There is also some evidence that periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS) are associated with on chromosome 6p21.2. The presence of a positive family history suggests that there may be a genetic involvement in the etiology of RLS. There are no specific tests for WED/RLS, but non-specific laboratory tests are used to rule out other causes such as vitamin deficiencies. According to the National Institutes of Health's National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, four symptoms are used to confirm the diagnosis: Other than preventing the underlying causes, generally no method of preventing WED/RLS has been established or studied. If WED/RLS is due to specific treatable causes (specific medications or treatable conditions), then treatment of those causes may also remove or reduce RLS. Otherwise medical responses focus on treating the condition, either symptomatically or by targeting lifestyle changes and bodily processes capable of modifying its expression or severity. Treatment of Willis-Ekbom Disease/restless legs syndrome involves identifying the cause of symptoms when possible. The treatment process is designed to reduce symptoms, including decreasing the number of nights with WED/RLS symptoms, the severity of RLS symptoms and nighttime awakenings. Improving the quality of life is another goal in treatment. This means improving overall quality of life, decreasing daytime somnolence, and improving the quality of sleep. Pharmacologic treatment involves dopamine agonists or gabapentin enacarbil as first line drugs for daily restless legs syndrome, and opioids for treatment of resistant cases. An algorithm created by Mayo Clinic researchers and endorsed by the Willis-Eckbom Disease Foundation provides guidance to the treating physician and patient, including non-pharmacological and pharmacological treatments. Treatment of primary RLS should not be considered until possible precipitating medical conditions are ruled out, especially venous disorders. RLS drug therapy is not curative and has side effects such as nausea, dizziness, hallucinations, orthostatic hypotension, or daytime sleep attacks. Secondary WED/RLS may be cured if precipitating medical conditions (anemia, venous disorder) are managed effectively. Secondary conditions causing WED/RLS include iron deficiency, varicose veins, and thyroid problems. Karl-Axel Ekbom, in his 1945 doctoral thesis on RLS, suspected venous disease in about 12.5% of cases. But due to the unavailability of Doppler ultrasound imaging technology (the diagnostic tool that detects abnormal blood flow in the veins - "venous reflux" - the pathological basis for varicose veins) at that time, Ekbom may have underestimated the role of venous disease. In uncontrolled prospective series, improvement of RLS was achieved in a high percentage of patients presenting with a combination of RLS and venous disease and had sclerotherapy or other treatment for the correction of venous insufficiency. Nonpharmacologic treatments may also reduce the symptoms or their severity. For example, since fatigue may worsen the symptoms, then relaxation techniques, soaking in a warm bath, or massaging the legs can all help aid in relaxation and relief of WED/RLS symptoms. Some other techniques are avoiding caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco; exercising every day; maintaining a schedule of relaxation; and avoiding heavy meals before bed. These techniques can be used with medication or by themselves for those who do not want medication. For symptoms that occur in the evening, patients may find that activities that alert the mind, such as crossword puzzles and video games, may reduce symptoms. Many patients may also benefit from WED/RLS support groups. Stretching the leg muscles can bring temporary relief.Walking and moving the legs, as the name "Restless Legs" implies, brings temporary relief. In fact, those suffering from WED/RLS often have an almost uncontrollable need to walk and therefore relieve the symptoms while they are moving. Unfortunately the symptoms usually return immediately after the moving and walking ceases. Hot or cold showers or baths have also been known to improve symptoms as has lying on one's front on the floor for approximately half an hour. Monochromatic near-infrared light treatment has also been shown to decrease symptoms associated with WED/RLS. A study showed there was a steady decrease in symptoms over the four weeks in the treatment group, and after four weeks of treatment, the treatment group had a significantly greater improvement in RLS symptoms than the control group. According to some guidelines, all people with WED/RLS should have their serum ferritin level tested. The ferritin level, a measure of the body's iron stores, should be at least 50 µg/L (or ng/mL, an equivalent unit) for those with WED/RLS. Oral iron supplements, taken under a doctor's care, can increase ferritin levels. For some people, increasing ferritin will eliminate or reduce RLS symptoms; a ferritin level of 50 µg/L is not sufficient for some sufferers and increasing the level to 80 µg/L may further reduce symptoms. However, at least 40% of people will not notice any improvement. Treatment with IV iron is being tested at the US Mayo Clinic and Johns Hopkins Hospital. It is dangerous to take iron supplements without first having ferritin levels tested, as many people with WED/RLS do not have low ferritin and taking iron when it is not called for can cause iron overload disorder, a potentially dangerous condition. For those whose WED/RLS disrupts or prevents sleep or regular daily activities, medication may be required. Many doctors currently use, and the Mayo Clinic algorithm includes, medication from four categories: There are, however, issues with the use of dopamine agonists. Dopamine agonists have caused augmentation. This is a medical condition where the drug itself causes symptoms to increase in severity and/or occur earlier in the day. Dopamine agonists may also cause rebound, when symptoms increase as the drug wears off. In many cases, the longer dopamine agonists are used the higher the risk of augmentation and rebound as well as the severity of the symptoms. Also, a recent study indicated that dopamine agonists used in Willis-Ekbom Disease/restless leg syndrome patients can lead to an increase in compulsive gambling. Dopamine agonists are used as a treatment because WED/RLS symptoms coincide with that of dopamine levels, with the majority of symptoms occurring late at night when dopamine levels are at their lowest. Recently, several major pharmaceutical companies are reported to be marketing drugs without an explicit approval for WED/RLS, which are "off-label" applications for drugs approved for other diseases. The Restless Legs Syndrome Foundation received 44% of its $1.4 million in funding from these pharmaceutical groups. Cannabis may help people who experience WED/RLS sensations fall asleep much faster than normal, eliminate nausea caused from medication, and relieve pain. Although still restricted by the Federal Government, many states do consider WED/RLS a medical condition for Medical Marijuana.  (A pill form called Tetrahydrocannabinol eliminates the primary health hazards associated with marijuana use, such as smoking.) Quinine is frequently used off label to treat WED/RLS but is not recommended by the FDA due to its risk of serious hematological side effects. A meta-analysis published November 2007 combined previous 6–12 week long placebo-controlled studies done for ropinirole, which was the first medication to receive FDA-approved labeling for use in WED/RLS, and pramipexole to indirectly compare adverse reactions and efficacy. It found that while both drugs had the same efficacy, pramipexole had significantly lower incidences of nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. This led the authors to conclude: "differences in efficacy and tolerability favouring pramipexole over ropinirole can be observed." In a randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial by Sagheb, et al., vitamins C, E and their combination were found to be effective in the treatment of WED/RLS in hemodialysis patients compared to the placebo. Moreover, these medications were found to be safe and without major side effects. WED/RLS symptoms may gradually worsen with age, though more slowly for those with the idiopathic form of WED/RLS than for patients who also suffer from an associated medical condition. Nevertheless, current therapies can control the disorder, minimizing symptoms and increasing periods of restful sleep. In addition, some patients have remissions, periods in which symptoms decrease or disappear for days, weeks, or months, although symptoms usually eventually reappear. Being diagnosed with RLS does not indicate or foreshadow another neurological disease. Claims about the prevalence of Willis-Ekbom Disease/restless legs syndrome can be confusing because its severity and frequency varies enormously between individual sufferers. WED/RLS affects an estimated 7% to 10% of the general population in North America and Europe. A minority of sufferers (around 2.7% of the population) experience daily or severe symptoms. RLS is twice as common in women as in men, and Caucasians are more prone to WED/RLS than people of African descent. WED/RLS occurs in 3% of individuals from the Mediterranean or Middle Eastern region, and in 1–5% of those from the Far East, indicating that different genetic or environmental factors, including diet, may play a role in the prevalence of this syndrome. With age, RLS becomes more common, and RLS diagnosed at an older age runs a more severe course. WED/RLS is even more common in individuals with iron deficiency, pregnancy and end-stage renal disease. Neurologic conditions linked to RLS include Parkinson disease, spinal cerebellar atrophy, spinal stenosis, lumbosacral radiculopathy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2. Approximately 80–90% of people with RLS also have periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), which causes slow "jerks" or flexions of the affected body part. These occur during sleep (PLMS = periodic limb movement while sleeping) or while awake (PLMW—periodic limb movement while waking). The National Sleep Foundation's 1998 Sleep in America poll showed that up to 25 percent of pregnant women developed WED/RLS during the third trimester. The first known medical description of WED/RLS was by Sir Thomas Willis in 1672. Willis (1621–1675) is considered to be the founder of clinical neuroscience and is most famous for his description of the Circle of Willis, the arterial circle at the base of the brain. His contributions to the understanding of the human brain and medical science were extensive and revolutionary at the time. Known to be a keen observer of his patients' symptoms, Willis emphasized the sleep disruption and limb movements experienced by sufferers of RLS. Initially published in Latin (De Anima Brutorum, 1672) but later translated to English (The London Practice of Physick, 1685), Willis wrote: Subsequently, other descriptions of WED/RLS were published, including those by Francois Boissier de Sauvages (1763), Magnus Huss (1849), Theodur Wittmaack (1861), George Miller Beard (1880), Georges Gilles de la Tourette (1898), Hermann Oppenheim (1923) and Frederick Gerard Allison (1943). However, it was not until almost three centuries after Willis, in 1945, that Karl-Axel Ekbom (1907–1977) provided a detailed and comprehensive report of this condition in his doctoral thesis, Restless legs: clinical study of hitherto overlooked disease. Ekbom coined the term "restless legs" and continued work on this disorder throughout his career. He described the essential diagnostic symptoms, differential diagnosis from other conditions, prevalence, relation to anemia, and common occurrence during pregnancy. Ekbom's work was largely ignored until it was rediscovered by Arthur S. Walters and Wayne A. Hening in the 1980s. Subsequent landmark publications include 1995 and 2003 papers, which revised and updated the diagnostic criteria. Journal of Parkinsonism and RLS is the first peer reviewed, online, open access journal dedicated to publishing research about Parkinson's disease and was founded by a Canadian neurologist Dr. Abdul Qayyum Rana. As with many diseases with diffuse symptoms, there is controversy among physicians as to whether WED/RLS is a distinct syndrome. The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke publishes an information sheet characterizing the syndrome but acknowledging it as a difficult diagnosis. Some physicians consider it a real entity that has specific diagnostic criteria. Many doctors express the view that the incidence of Willis-Ekbom Disease/restless leg syndrome is exaggerated by manufacturers of drugs used to treat it. Others believe it is an underrecognized and undertreated disorder. Some of the controversy results from the fact that certain pharmaceutical companies used medical representatives (i.e., salespeople) to perform investigations into the treatment of WED/RLS even though those companies had no licensed treatments for the condition. Further, GlaxoSmithKline ran advertisements that, while not promoting off-license use of their drug (ropinirole) for treatment of WED/RLS, did link to the Ekbom Support Group website. That website contained statements advocating the use of ropinirole to treat WED/RLS. The ABPI ruled against GSK in this case. Another point of confusion is that Willis-Ekbom Disease/RLS and delusional parasitosis are entirely different conditions that share part of the Wittmaack-Ekbom syndrome eponym, as both syndromes were described by the same person, Karl-Axel Ekbom. 
