 Ricardo Azziz is the 8th President of Georgia Health Sciences University and CEO of the Georgia Health Sciences Health System in Augusta, Ga. GHSU includes the Medical College of Georgia, the College of Dental Medicine, the College of Nursing, the College of Allied Health Sciences, and the College of Graduate Studies. Prior to his appointment as President of GHSU, Dr Azziz was the Helping Hand of Los Angeles Chair in Obstetrics and Gynecology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where he also served as director of the Center for Androgen Related Research & Discovery. At the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, he was a professor, vice chairman of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and the assistant dean for Clinical and Translational Sciences. Other past positions include former chairman of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s Advisory Committee on Reproductive Health Drugs; former member of the Reproductive Endocrinology Study Section of the National Institutes of Health (NIH); former member of the Independent Citizens Oversight Committee of the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, appointed by Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger; and past president of the Pennsylvania State College of Medicine Alumni Society. He currently serves as senior mentor of the Network of Minority Research Investigators of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; as senior executive director of the Androgen Excess & PCOS Society, of which he is also a founding member; and as representative for the Council of Academic Societies of the American Association of Medical Colleges. Dr. Azziz is a clinical translational researcher whose program in androgen excess disorders research has been funded by the NIH since 1988. In recognition, he was awarded the Society for Gynecological Investigation 2000 President’s Achievement Award. He is recipient of the 1992 Cheston M. Berlin Award of the Pennsylvania State College of Medicine Alumni Society, in recognition for outstanding service to the Society and its membership. He was named member of the Phi Kappa Phi honorary Society and the Beta Gamma Sigma Honor Society of AACSB Accredited Business Programs. Most recently he has created a number of controversies associated with his position at the Medical College of Georgia. During the merger of the Medical College of Georgia and Augusta State University, the final name chosen was contrary to the result chosen by local residents. This resulted in a "Save the A" campaign the avoid the new "Georgia Regents University at Augusta" name. Additionally, he is being investigated for the use of University resources for personal gain, specifically: (a) using University transportation during a niece's wedding; and (b) commissioning a three-car carport addition to the University-owned house using University funds without seeking approval. The $26,000 project is already 50% over budget and work has been halted until the required approval is obtained. Azziz R, Nestler JE, Dewailly D, eds. Androgen Excess Disorders in Women. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia, Pa, 1997 Azziz R, Nestler JE, Dewailly D, eds. Androgen Excess Disorders in Women - Second Edition. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2006 Azziz R, ed. The Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Currents Concepts On Pathogenesis And Clinical Practice. Springer, New York, NY, 2007 {{Persondata | NAME =Azziz, Ricardo | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
