 Rickets is a softening of bones in children due to deficiency or impaired metabolism of vitamin D, phosphorus or calcium, Osteomalacia is a similar condition occurring in adults, generally due to a deficiency of vitamin D. The origin of the word rickets is probably from the Old English word wrickken ('to twist'). The Greek word "rachitis" (ῥαχίτης, meaning "in or of the spine") was later adopted as the scientific term for rickets, due chiefly to the words' similarity in sound. Signs and symptomsSigns and symptoms of rickets include: An X-ray or radiograph of an advanced sufferer from rickets tends to present in a classic way: bow legs (outward curve of long bone of the legs) and a deformed chest. Changes in the skull also occur causing a distinctive "square headed" appearance (Caput Quadratum). These deformities persist into adult life if not treated. Long-term consequences include permanent bends or disfiguration of the long bones, and a curved back. The primary cause of rickets is a vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D is required for proper calcium absorption from the gut. Sunlight, especially ultraviolet light, lets human skin cells convert Vitamin D from an inactive to active state. In the absence of vitamin D, dietary calcium is not properly absorbed, resulting in hypocalcaemia, leading to skeletal and dental deformities and neuromuscular symptoms, e.g. hyperexcitability. Foods that contain vitamin D include butter, eggs, fish liver oils, margarine, fortified milk and juice, portabella & shiitake mushrooms, and oily fishes such as tuna, herring, and salmon. A rare X-linked dominant form exists called Vitamin D resistant rickets. Cases have been reported in Britain in recent years of rickets in children of many social backgrounds caused by insufficient production in the body of vitamin D because the sun's ultraviolet light was not reaching the skin due to use of strong sunblock, too much "covering up" in sunlight, or not getting out into the sun. Other cases have been reported among the children of some ethnic groups in which mothers avoid exposure to the sun for religious or cultural reasons, leading to a maternal shortage of vitamin D; and people with darker skins need more sunlight to maintain vitamin D levels. The British Medical Journal reported in 2010 that doctors in Newcastle on Tyne saw 20 cases of rickets per year. Rickets had been a significant malaise in London, especially during the Industrial Revolution. Persistent thick fog and heavy industrial smog permeating the city blocked out significant amounts of sunlight so much so that up to 80 percent of children at one time had varying degrees of rickets in one form or the other. Rickets may be diagnosed with the help of: The treatment and prevention of rickets is known as antirachitic. The most common treatment of rickets is the use of Vitamin D. However, surgery may be required to remove severe bone abnormalities. Treatment involves increasing dietary intake of calcium, phosphates and vitamin D. Exposure to ultraviolet B light (sunshine when the sun is highest in the sky), cod liver oil, halibut-liver oil, and viosterol are all sources of vitamin D. A sufficient amount of ultraviolet B light in sunlight each day and adequate supplies of calcium and phosphorus in the diet can prevent rickets. Darker-skinned people need to be exposed longer to the ultraviolet rays. The replacement of vitamin D has been proven to correct rickets using these methods of ultraviolet light therapy and medicine. Recommendations are for 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D a day for infants and children. Children who do not get adequate amounts of vitamin D are at increased risk of rickets. Vitamin D is essential for allowing the body to uptake calcium for use in proper bone calcification and maintenance. Sufficient vitamin D levels can also be achieved through dietary supplementation and/or exposure to sunlight. Vitamin D<sub>3</sub> (cholecalciferol) is the preferred form since it is more readily absorbed than vitamin D<sub>2</sub>. Most dermatologists recommend vitamin D supplementation as an alternative to unprotected ultraviolet exposure due to the increased risk of skin cancer associated with sun exposure. Endogenous production with full body exposure to sunlight is approximately 250 µg (10,000 IU) per day. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), all infants, including those who are exclusively breast-fed, may need Vitamin D supplementation until they start drinking at least of vitamin D-fortified milk or formula a day. In developed countries, rickets is a rare disease (incidence of less than 1 in 200,000). Those at higher risk for developing rickets include: Infants with rickets often suffer bone fractures. This sometimes leads to child abuse allegations. This issue appears to be more common for solely nursing infants of black mothers, in winter in temperate climates, suffering poor nutrition and no vitamin D supplementation. People with darker skin produce less vitamin D than those with lighter skin, for the same amount of sunlight. Greek physician Soranus of Ephesus, one of the chief representatives of the Methodic school of medicine who practiced in Alexandria and subsequently in Rome, reported deformation of the bones in infants as early as the first and second centuries AD. Rickets was not defined as a specific medical condition until 1645, when an English physician Daniel Whistler gave the earliest known description of the disease. In 1650 a treatise on rickets was published by Francis Glisson, a physician at Caius College, Cambridge. 
