 Robert Wood Johnson Medical School (RWJMS) is an American medical school located in Piscataway and New Brunswick, New Jersey, and one of the eight schools of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (UMDNJ). A recent state-wide health sciences restructuring effort will designate Robert Wood as the graduate medical school of Rutgers University School of Biomedical and Health Sciences. Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital is the medical school’s primary teaching hospital, and together the two comprise one of the Northeast's premier academic medical centers. In addition, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School has 34 other hospital affiliates and ambulatory care sites throughout the region. RWJMS is ranked among the top 100 U.S. medical schools in both research and primary care by [[U.S. News & World Report]]. The medical school is named after Robert Wood Johnson II, the former president and chairman of the board of [[Johnson & Johnson]]. Nearly 2,800 distinguished full and part-time faculty and 2,280 staff members support Robert Wood's mission of medical education, research, health care delivery, and the promotion of community health. Robert Wood Johnson Medical School encompasses 22 basic science and clinical departments, as well as several centers and institutes including the Cancer Institute of New Jersey (one of only 41 in the United States), the Child Health Institute of New Jersey, the Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, the Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Institute, and the Stem Cell Institute of New Jersey. Robert Wood Johnson Medical School was formed in 1961 as "Rutgers Medical School", part of Rutgers University, with a planning grant from the Kellogg Foundation. In the fall of 1963, the first faculty members joined the school and the first class of 16 students entered in September 1966. At the end of two years of instruction, students transferred to other four-year medical schools to complete their education. In 1970, the Rutgers Medical School was organizationally united with the New Jersey Medical School in Newark and the New Jersey Dental School to form the "College of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey" (now the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey), and became a full four year medical school. Raritan Valley Hospital, in Green Brook, New Jersey, was the school's original clinical teaching affiliate, until 1977 when Middlesex General Hospital (now Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital) in New Brunswick became the primary teaching hospital of Rutgers Medical School. The first doctor of medicine degrees were conferred in June 1974. In 1980, the Board of Trustees established a second clinical campus of the medical school in Camden with Cooper University Medical Center, (now Cooper University Hospital). On July 1, 1986, UMDNJ-Rutgers Medical School was renamed UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School. In 1995 the Clinical Academic Building (CAB), a facility for outpatient activities, research laboratories, academic offices and support programs, opened adjacent to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, in New Brunswick, and in 1997, the Cancer Institute of New Jersey (CINJ) opened its doors. In October 2003, the school opened and dedicated the RWJMS Research Building in Piscataway, which houses twenty-seven research laboratories as well as a core imaging suite, interdepartmental instruments, and a core nuclear magnetic resonance facility. Construction of the Child Health Institute of New Jersey was completed in 2005, linking RWJMS, The Bristol-Myers Squibb Children's Hospital, and the PSE&G; Children's Specialized Hospital, in New Brunswick. This tri-institutional biomedical research and pediatric care center serves as the cornerstone of the children’s academic campus of the medical school bringing the scientific and clinical programs together with hospital based programs. In May 2004, the State of New Jersey created the Stem Cell Institute of New Jersey. Funded through a public-private partnership, it is operated jointly by the UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School and Rutgers University The medical school has more than 2,800 full-time, part-time and volunteer faculty and 2,280 staff members. Approximately 680 medical students are enrolled at RWJMS, 99% of whom are New Jersey residents. 48% are women and 18% of the enrolled students are underrepresented minorities. RWJMS ranks among the top 10 percent nationally of medical schools in minority student enrollment. The Class of 2012 had the highest MCAT scores in biological sciences in the history of RWJMS and more than half are women, 58 percent. Six of the first-year students were also admitted to the MD/PhD program. The 156 members of the first-year class were selected from an applicant pool of 3,551. Eighteen percent graduated from Ivy League schools, and 22 percent are graduates of Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. They were born in 21 different nations; half of the class are natives of New Jersey. They have served in global health settings in 18 different countries worldwide. RWJMS sponsors 45 graduate medical education programs, 41 are accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) and four either by Speciality Boards or without the option of accreditation. These include: anesthesia, occupational medicine, family medicine, medicine, neurology, obstetrics/gynecology, pathology, pediatrics, psychiatry, radiology and surgery. There are 450 residents in programs accredited by the ACGME or the ABMS. There are four additional fellowships for which ACGME or ABMS accreditation is not available. Continuing medical education programs are conducted on a global basis. The first and second year curriculum is taught by faculty in the basic science departments which include Biochemistry, Molecular Genetics, Microbiology and Immunology, Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Pharmacology, and Physiology and Biophysics. Clinical experience is introduced in the first year through the Patient Centered Medicine course. Clinical training at RWJMS is conducted with the use of standardized patients, Objective Structured Clinical Examinations (OSCEs), and individual observation and feedback by faculty. All educational experiences undergo evaluation by students and faculty throughout the four years. Students at RWJMS make active contributions to the medical and scientific community as part of their medical education. All students are required to complete an independent research or service project and publish or present the results as a requirement for graduation. RWJMS students receive their clinical training at one of two major academic medical centers: Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, or Cooper University Hospital in Camden. The Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at RWJMS offers the opportunity for advanced research studies toward a master's or doctorate degree at one of three cooperating institutions: RWJMS, Princeton University, or Rutgers University. Its newest program is the Master's degree in Clinical & Translational Research. Research at Robert Wood Johnson Medical School covers a broad spectrum, from clinical and basic studies designed to improve the diagnosis and treatment of human diseases to fundamental studies exploring new areas of molecular biology, biotechnology, and informatics. This range of leading research provides a wealth of training opportunities for physicianscientists,postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and medical students. Core facilities provide the research community at the medical school with specialized instrumentation, services and methodology. The core facilities are located throughout the campuses, allowing for accessibility by all faculty, staff and students. The Research Annex Building on the Piscataway campus serves as an administrative area for the core facilities, in addition to housing a compilation of core facilities. This organization of space creates a scientific environment to include:classroom settings, seminars and programmatic collaborations. RWJMS received $109 million in research grant awards in FY 2008. Of this amount, $49.9 million was from the National Institutes of Health. RWJMS has approximately 85 affiliated centers and institutes. The major centers and institutes include: The Eric B. Chandler Health Center, a federally funded community health center in New Brunswick, is owned and operated by RWJMS in collaboration with a community board. The center provides primary care in the disciplines of internal medicine, obstetrics and gynecology, and pediatrics. Other services include specialized care in HIV/AIDS, preventive and restorative dental care, podiatry, nutritional counseling, patient education, and social services. Chandler Health Center serves as a major teaching site for medical students and residents in pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, internal medicine and family medicine. The center provides care to over 10,000 patients in nearly 40,000 medical and dental encounters per year. The Homeless and Indigent Population Health Outreach Project (HIPHOP) in New Brunswick and the Health Outreach Project (HOP) in Camden, initiated and administered by RWJMS students, provide health and social assistance to the disadvantaged and the underserved in these communities. Learning objectives are interwoven in the context of service to the community. Experiences in promotion of population health help prepare students for careers in service. The Robert Wood Johnson Medical Group (RWJMG), the medical school’s multi-specialty group practice, is the largest in New Jersey, with more than 600 physicians providing care in 210 specialties. RWJMG physicians provide clinical care at numerous hospitals and ambulatory care sites throughout the state. More than one million patient visits and medical procedures are performed annually. The Cancer Institute of New Jersey (CINJ) provides close to 80,000 patient visits each year. In addition, more than 15,000 cancer patients are diagnosed and treated annually at one of CINJ’s network hospitals across New Jersey. UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School is accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education of the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) and the American Medical Association. The medical school is a full member of AAMC. The University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (UMDNJ) is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools. All education programs of UMDNJ have been approved by the academic, governmental and professional agencies with responsibilities in specific areas of specialization. The primary and affiliated teaching hospitals of the medical school are accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO). 
