 Roy Sydney Porter (31 December 1946 – 3 March 2002) was a British historian noted for his prolific work on the history of medicine. He retired in 2001 from the director of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine at University College, London. Porter grew up in South London and attended Wilson's School in Camberwell. He won a scholarship to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he studied under J. H. Plumb. His contemporaries included Simon Schama and Andrew Wheatcroft. He achieved a double starred first and became a junior Fellow in 1968, studying under Robert M. Young and lecturing on the British Enlightenment. In 1972, he moved to Churchill College as the Director of Studies in History, later becoming Dean in 1977. He received his doctorate in 1974, publishing a thesis on the history of geology as a scientific discipline. He was then appointed to the post of Assistant Lecturer in European History at Cambridge University and promoted to Lecturer in European History in 1977. In 1979 he joined the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine (part of the University College, London) as a lecturer. In 1993 he became Professor of Social History at the Institute. He briefly served as its Director. In 2000, Porter published The Enlightenment: Britain and the Creation of the Modern World. He retired in September 2001, moving to the Sussex coast, where he wanted to learn to play the saxophone, cultivate his allotment and engage in some travelling. He died of a heart attack five months later, while cycling. His memorial service was on April 22, 2002 at St Pancras Parish Church. He was married four times in his life, firstly to Sue Limb (1970), then Jacqueline Rainfray (1983), then Dorothy Watkins (1987) and finally Hannah Augstein. At the time of his death, his partner was Natsu Hattori. He was known for the fact that he needed very little sleep. Roy Porter made many television and radio appearances. He was an original presenter of BBC Radio 3's Nightwaves, a programme on which he was scheduled to appear, discussing doctors in literature, at the point of his death. He also spoke at a large variety of events, and was known for his oratory talents. Roy Porter was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1994, and was made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Psychiatrists. A plaque for the memory of Roy Porter was unveiled by the Mayor of Lewisham in a ceremony that took place on Thursday 5 June at 13 Camplin Street, New Cross Gate, London. Starting with the publishing of his PhD thesis, as The Making of Geology in 1977, Porter wrote or edited over 100 books, an academic output that was, and is, considered remarkable. He is particularly notable for his work in the history of medicine, in pioneering an approach that focuses on patients rather than doctors. Despite his recognition in the history of medicine, he is quoted as saying, "I'm not really a medical historian. I'm a social historian and an 18th century man". In addition to the history of medicine and other sciences, he specialised in the social history of 18th-century Britain and the Enlightenment. He also wrote and lectured on the history of London. With G. E. Berrios, Porter published A History of Clinical Psychiatry (1985) and co-edited the international journal History of Psychiatry (1989). He also edited the journal History of Science for many years. In 2007 Roberta Bivins and John V. Pickstone edited Medicine, Madness and Social History: Essays in Honour of Roy Porter (Palgrave Macmillan). Several of the essays address Porter's work directly, and William F. Bynum appends a biographical sketch. {{Persondata | NAME =Porter, Roy | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 1946 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH = 2002 | PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
