 The Royal Medical Society (RMS) is the oldest medical society in the United Kingdom (although this claim is also made by the earlier London-based Society of Apothecaries (1617) which is permitted to award medical degrees). Known originally as 'the Medical Society' when it was established in 1737, it was granted a Royal Charter in 1778. The RMS is a professional society engaged in the advancement of medical knowledge and provision of assistance to medical students and professionals. It is based in Edinburgh, Scotland, and has members throughout the world. It is not to be confused with the younger Royal Society of Medicine of London. The RMS sold its extensive library, built up throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, at 3 sales at Sotheby's in London in 1969. Much of the collection was purchased by the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Although cadavers are no longer kept, the Society still encourages medical learning. The RMS hosts talks for students from physicians and surgeons from all fields each Tuesday. This year Neurology, Cardiovascular medicine and a series of talks covering Emergency medicine are just a few of the topics that will be presented to the Society. After each lecture, members hold a private business meeting and is an opportunity for students to present their research to their peers. Also on offer are practical tutorials (plastering, venepuncture) and the student-led exam tutorials at the end of semesters. There are also many other events throughout the year: Freshers’ Week events (including the infamous White Coat Pub Crawl); Hallowe’en parties; a Burns Supper and the Presidents' Annual Dinner — this year taking place in the Playfair Library in the University’s Old College. The RMS is found above the Potterrow Union on Bristo Square, in the centre of student life in Edinburgh. Members have 24-hour access to all facilities including: a lecture theatre, a well-stocked medical library, a computer suite, learning resource centre as well as a kitchen, TV area, pool table and a seating lounge. During the Edinburgh International Festival, the rooms act a performance venue under the Pleasance and host the Performers'/VIP bar (Brooke's Bar). The RMS also has a fund for travel and study grants: awarded to members for research at home or abroad and for final year studies. The estate, is managed by the RMS Trust, which has charitable status. The running of the Society is managed by the RMS Council - consisting of a Senior President, three Junior Presidents and 11 Convenors - each concerned with particular areas of the Society - listed below. The Council is also aided by Dr Edward Duvall, Treasurer and Mrs Elizabeth Singh, Permanent Secretary. The Senior President for the 274th Session is Miss Kristina Lee, a third year medical student. The council for the 275th session is as follows: The council for the 276th session is as follows: 
