 Samuel G. Benady MBE (Gibraltar, 11 September 1937) is a Gibraltarian historian, novelist and retired pediatrician of Sephardic Jewish descent. He is a regular contributor to the Gibraltar Heritage Trust's newsletter and lecturer in the Gibraltar Museum, and author of several works related to the History of Gibraltar and also fiction works. According to the Gibraltar Chronicle, Benady is "Gibraltar’s well known and prolific author". Benady was born in Gibraltar, where his family has lived since the 18th century, and received his Medicine degree in London. He worked as a paediatrician in Bristol, Jerusalem and Gibraltar, where he ran the Child Health service. Benady worked for the Gibraltar Health Authority from 1980 until his retirement in 2002. In 2007 he was awarded a MBE "for services to health care and voluntary work". In 1990, Benady published the two short stories in Sherlock Holmes in Gibraltar. The pastiches are set in the pre-Watson days. In the first one, The Abandoned Brigantine, Sherlock Holmes solves the mystery of the Mary Celeste while in the second, The Gibraltar Letter, the detective solves the case of the abduction of the Duke of Connaught, while he was posted to Gibraltar. In 1992, after reading La compra de Gibraltar por los conversos andaluces, ("The purchase of Gibraltar by Andalusian conversos"), a monograph by Diego Lamelas about the story of the Cordova conversos who purchased Gibraltar in the 15th century, Benady translated and published it in English as The Sale of Gibraltar in 1474. Then, he approached the history of St. Bernard's Hospital, publishing Civil Hospital and Epidemics in Gibraltar. Diary of an Epidemic (coauthored with Prof. L A Sawchuk) was published in 2003. In 2005, Benady approached the biography genre publishing a work on Sir George Don, Lieutenant Governor of Gibraltar from 1814 to 1831.The Keys of the City: An Episode in the History of Gibraltar, also published in 2005, is a historical novel based in his former translation of Lamelas' work. His last project is a detective mystery series set in early 19th century Gibraltar featuring the amateur detective Giovanni Bresciano and coauthored with Mary Chiappe. 
