 The School of Medicine at the University of Manchester is one of the largest in the UK with around undergraduates, 1,400 postgraduates and staff. The school is divided into five separate divisions, also called schools, one of which, Manchester Medical School is responsible for medical undergraduate tuition. The others, Community-Based Medicine, Translational Medicine, Biomedicine, and Cancer and Enabling Sciences Sciences, are primarily postgraduate and research divisions. As of 2008 the medical school admits some 380 home medical students and a further 29 from overseas per year. The School of Anatomy at Manchester Royal Infirmary was opened by Joseph Jordan in 1814. In the intervening 60 years more than one private medical school existed in Manchester: the most successful was that in Pine Street not far south of the Infirmary. The Royal Manchester School of Medicine and Surgery did not open until 1874 (at Owens College), and medical degrees were awarded by the Victoria University from 1883. The school was made co-educational in 1899 after a long and contentious debate about whether women could be members of the College at all. The first female medical student to qualify Catherine Chisholm practised as a paediatrician after graduating. The success of the school meant that the building needed to be extended twice, in 1883 and 1894. From 1903/04 degrees were awarded by the Victoria University of Manchester. A considerable space was allocated to the library of the Manchester Medical Society (founded 1834) which until 1930 remained in their possession while accommodated in the University. The library became part of the university library at that time and remained in the building until 1981 when it was transferred into the present Main Library building of the John Rylands University Library (part of the rare books went to the John Rylands Library). Additional departments were added from time to time: chronologically these were pharmaceutics, dentistry, public health. A dental hospital was associated with the department of dentistry. Until 1908 the Manchester Royal Infirmary was at Piccadilly a mile away from the school but in 1908 it moved to a new site on Oxford Road much nearer the medical school and the two institutions were interdependent. The medical school expanded greatly in the 1950s, culminating in the opening of the Stopford Building in 1973, and additionally providing clinical studies for students who had completed their pre-clinical studies at St Andrews. Pre-clinical teaching is based in the Stopford Building in Oxford Road, Manchester for the first two years. Clinical teaching takes place over three teaching 'sectors' or NHS trusts in Greater Manchester: Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (incorporating the Manchester Royal Infirmary, Saint Mary's Hospital for Women and Children, and the Children's Hospital, opened in June 2009); Salford Royal (Hope Hospital); and the University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust in Wythenshawe; and one in Lancashire, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (Preston). Some of the students who have completed their pre-clinical education at the University of St Andrews School of Medicine join students who have completed pre-clinical years in Manchester to do their clinical years together. 
