 Scott Dulchavsky, M.D., PhD. is the Roy D. McClure Chairman of Surgery and Surgeon-in-Chief at the Henry Ford Hospital; Professor of Surgery, Molecular Biology and Genetics at the Wayne State University School of Medicine, and nationally recognized expert in his field. Dr. Dulchavsky has two beautiful children, Alexandria and Mark. He received his B.S. Degree in Physiology from the Michigan State University; M.D degree and PhD in Molecular Biology and Genetics at the Wayne State University School of Medicine, where he served as Chief Resident; and surgical and trauma training at Duke University, under the tutelage of Dr. David Sabiston. Dr. Dulchavsky previously held the title of Surgical Chief and Director of the Intensive Care Unit at Detroit Receiving Hospital. As Chairman of Surgery at the Henry Ford Hospital, Dr. Dulchavsky oversees the Cardiac, Vascular, Plastics, Colorectal, Trauma, Transplant, and General Surgery programs at the Henry Ford Health System. He has mentored over 100 post-doctoral, graduate and medical students, and others. He has received numerous medical and resident teaching awards during his career. Dr. Dulchavsky is a prolific researcher and is the principal investigator for NASA for the Advanced Diagnostic Ultrasound in Microgravity Project (ADUM) and several studies in the Smart Medical Systems and Technologies branch of the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI), involving teaching of ultrasound to the astronaut crews about the International Space Station. Dr. Dulchavsky is also funded by NASA to establish micro-invasive surgical techniques in zero gravity through the NSBRI. Ultrasound images from space from a variety of body regions have been shown to be of diagnostic quality. This work has been expanded to include professional Football, Baseball, and Ice Hockey teams as well as the Winter Olympic Games. He has also led a pilot study to expand ultrasound education to medical students at the Wayne State University School of Medicine. Dr. Dulchavsky has authored over 200 peer-reviewed publications, numerous text chapters and edited a textbook, "Reflections" on the writings of Alexander Walt. Dr. Dulchavsky has also been elected to numerous professional organizations including the Society of University Surgeons, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Central Surgical Society, American Association for the Surgery of Trauma, the Society of Clinical Surgery, and the American Surgical Association. He maintains an active role in local and national medical associations including the American College of Surgeons where he serves on the Committee on Trauma and as the Vice Chair, Technology and Research. Dr. Dulchavsky is also on the management team for Mediphan Technologies, an ultrasound research company. {{Persondata | NAME =Dulchavsky, Scott | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
