 It is named for BS Sever, who characterized it in 1912. The most prominent symptom of Sever's disease is heel pain which is usually aggravated by physical activity such as walking, running or jumping.The pain is localised to the posterior and plantar side of the heel over the calcaneal apophysis. Sometimes, the pain may be so severe that it may cause limping and interfere with physical performance in sports. External appearance of the heel is almost always normal, and signs of local disease such as edema, erythema (redness) is absent. The main diagnostic tool is pain on medial- lateral compression of the calcaneus in the area of growth plate, so called squeeze test. Foot radiographs are usually normal. Therefore the diagnosis of Sever's disease is primarily clinical. Sever’s disease is directly related to overuse of the bone and tendons in the heel. This can come from playing sports or anything that involves a lot of heel movement. It can be associated with starting a new sport, or the start of a new season. Children who are going through adolescence are also at risk of getting it because the heel bone grows quicker than the leg. <ref name="pmid15555843"> Too much weight bearing on the heel can also cause it, as can excessive traction since the bones and tendons are still developing. It occurs more commonly in children who over-pronate, and involves both heels in more than half of patients. Treatment may consist of one or more of the following: Sever’s disease is self-recovering, meaning that it will go away on its own when the foot is used less or when the bone is through growing. The condition is not expected to create any long-term disability, and expected to subside in 2–8 weeks. However, while the disease does subside quickly, it can recur, for example at the start of a new sports season. The only known cure is for children to outgrow the condition, and recurrences happen for an average of 18 months before this occurs.The disease may also take several years to stop, because it is often triggered by growing too fast.It is more common in boys, although occurs in girls as well. The average age of symptom onset is 9–11. 
