 Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI) or Masters' disease is an emerging infectious disease related to Lyme disease that occurs in southeastern and south-central United States. It is spread by tick bites, but the organism that causes the infection is unknown. This illness is a tick-borne disease carried by the Lone Star Tick Amblyomma americanum. This tick was first proposed as a possible vector of disease in 1984, and the illnesses associated with the tick called "Lyme-like disease", but it was not until the late 1990s that it was recognized that this was distinct from Lyme disease. Several studies have failed to detect Borrelia burgdorferi, which is the causative agent of Lyme disease, in patients from the southern United States. It has therefore been proposed that this disease may be caused by the related bacterium Borrelia lonestari, which is a spirochete that was first isolated in culture in 2004. However, this conclusion is controversial since the spirochete is not detected in all cases of the syndrome, which has led some authors to argue that the illness is not caused by a bacterial pathogen. The Centers for Disease Control is conducting a study to attempt to culture the bacteria responsible for causing Southern Tick Associated Rash Illness and is requesting participants for the study. In addition, individuals can submit ticks that cause a STARI like rash without participating in the study. http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/stari/ Diagnosis is based on a circular "bulls eye" rash at the site of infection called Erythema chronicum migrans, which is very similar to that seen in Lyme disease. However, the symptoms of STARI are mild, and resemble influenza, with fatigue, muscle pains, and headache. Fever is sometimes seen, but is not characteristic. Infections are treated with antibiotics, particularly doxycycline, and the acute symptoms appear to respond to these drugs. No serious long-term effects are known for this disease, but preliminary evidence suggests that if such symptoms do occur, they are less severe than those associated with Lyme disease. 
