 Spondyloarthropathy is any joint disease of the vertebral column. Spondyloarthropathy with inflammation is called spondylarthritis. In the broadest sense, the term spondyloarthropathy includes joint involvement of vertebral column from any type of joint disease, including rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, but the term is often used for a specific group of disorders with certain common features, the group often being termed specifically seronegative spondylarthropathies. They have an increased incidence of HLA-B27, as well as negative rheumatoid factor and ANA. Enthesopathy is also sometimes present in association with seronegative spondarthritides. Nonvertebral symptoms of spondyloarthropathies include asymmetric peripheral arthritis (which is distinct from rheumatoid arthritis), arthritis of the Toe IP Joints, sausage digits, achilles tenosynovitis, plantar fasciitis, costochondritis, iritis, and mucocutaneous lesions. However, lower back pain is the most common clinical presentation of the disease; this back pain is unique because it decreases with activity. Seronegative spondyloarthropathy (or seronegative spondyloarthritis) is a group of diseases involving the axial skeleton and having a negative serostatus. "Seronegative" refers to the fact that these diseases are negative for rheumatoid factor, indicating a different pathophysiological mechanism of disease than what is commonly seen in rheumatoid arthritis. The following conditions are typically included within the group of seronegative spondylarthropathies: Condition !! Percent of people with the condition who are HLA-B27 positive Ankylosing Spondylitis Reactive arthritis (Reiter's syndrome) 60-80% enteropathic spondylitis or spondylitis associated withinflammatory bowel disease (including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis) 60% Psoriatic arthritis 60% Isolated acute anterior uveitis 50% Undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy (USpA) 20-25% Some sources also include Behcet's disease and Whipple's disease. These diseases have the following conditions in common: 
