 A sprain is an injury in a joint, caused by the ligament being stretched beyond its own capacity. A muscular tear caused in the same manner is referred to as a strain. In cases where either ligament or muscle tissue is torn, immobilization and surgical repair may be necessary. Ligaments are tough, fibrous tissues that connect bones to other bones. Sprains can occur in any joint but are most common in the ankle and wrist. The diagnosis of a sprain injury is made by a physical examination. In most cases an x-ray (or stress x-ray) of the affected joint is obtained to ensure that there are no fractures. If a tear in the ligament is suspected, then an MRI or arthroscopy is obtained. MRI is usually ordered after swelling has subsided and can readily identify the presence of a ligament injury. Sprains typically occur when the joint is overextended. This can cause over stretching of the joints, tear or slipping of the ligament. Although any joint can experience a sprain, some of the more common include: There are certain factors which increase risk of sprains. Fatigue of muscles generally leads to sprains. When one suddenly starts to exercise after a sedentary lifestyle, sprains are quite common.While scientific studies are lacking, it is often thought that not warming-up is a common cause of sprains in athletes. Warming-up is thought to loosen the joint, increases blood flow and makes the joint more flexible. Diagnosis of sprains is not difficult but in most cases X-rays are obtained to ensure that there is no fracture. In many cases, if the injury is prolonged, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is performed to look at surrounding soft tissues and the ligament. The first modality for a sprain can be remembered using the acronym RICE. The treatment of sprains depends on the extent of injury and the joint involved. Medications like non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can relieve pain. Weight bearing should be gradual and advanced as tolerated. Ice and compression (cold compression therapy) will not completely stop swelling and pain, but will help to minimize them as the sprain begins to heal itself. Careful management of swelling is critical to the healing process as additional fluid may pool in the sprained area. The joint should be exercised again fairly soon, in milder cases from 1 to 3 days after injury. Special exercises are sometimes needed in order to regain strength and help reduce the risk of ongoing problems. The joint may need to be supported by taping or bracing, helping protect it from re-injury. Prolonged immobilization delays the healing of a sprain, as it usually leads to muscle atrophy and stiff joint. The components of an effective rehabilitation for all sprain injuries include increasing range of motion and progressive muscle strengthening exercise. These should be taken care of without delay. 
