 St John New Zealand (also often referred to as St John Ambulance of New Zealand) is a charitable organisation providing healthcare services to the New Zealand public. The organisation provides Ambulance Services throughout New Zealand, and also plays an increasing role in meeting the broader health needs of New Zealand communities through a number of health services and products. St John services include emergency and non-emergency ambulance treatment and transport, event medical services, first aid training, the sale of first aid kits and supplies, programmes offering non-clinical support for patients and their family and friends, medical alarms, caring callers who phone to check on someone’s wellbeing and health shuttles to help people with impaired mobility attend essential appointments. St John provides ambulance services for approximately 90% of New Zealand’s population. The only areas where the organisation does not provide emergency ambulance services are Wairarapa and Wellington. St John treated or transported 403,261 patients in the year ending 30 June 2012, attending more than 350,000 emergency incidents. The 610 ambulances or operational vehicles, based at 205 stations, covered more than 18 million kilometres in the same time. The St John Ambulance Service comprises: When a person dials 111 for an ambulance in New Zealand, the call goes to one of three Ambulance Communication Centres located in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch. St John owns and runs the Ambulance Communication Centres in Auckland and Christchurch. The Wellington Ambulance Communication Centre is run in a joint venture with Wellington Free Ambulance. Dispatchers at the centres have medical knowledge and are trained to despatch and coordinate all land, water and air ambulance services. In addition to ambulance services, St John provide first aid training courses, kits and supplies, automated external defibrillators (AEDs) and first aid smartphone applications. St John offers various levels of first aid training ranging from basic training courses for the general public, to courses which help businesses meet the requirements of the Health and Safety in Employment Act, to advanced resuscitation training for health professionals. St John also offers specialised courses such as child, sports, electrical workers, outdoor and maritime first aid training. St John is registered with the New Zealand Qualifications Authority(NZQA). The organisation is also a member of the NZ Resuscitation Council (NZRC) and the Association of Emergency Care Training Providers (AECTP). Organisations can purchase AEDs from St John and learn how to use them. St John also sells first aid kids and supplies for home or business use. St John Youth programmes help young New Zealanders to develop first aid, health care, leadership and life skills. Penguins are aged 6 to 8, Cadets are aged 8 to 18. These programmes are fully funded by donations. St John provides health shuttles, youth programmes, hospital friends, phone friends and pet outreach therapy to help people live independently, get the social connections they need and improve their wellbeing. These services are run primarily by volunteers and are often free of charge. The Health Shuttle is a free community service that transports people to essential appointments. St John’s free Caring Caller service connects people who need a friend with people who have time to listen and chat. St John Friends of the Emergency Department (FED) and Hospital Friends volunteers provide comfort and support to hospital patients. The St John Safe Kids programme gives children an understanding of emergencies, as well as how and when to call an ambulance. St John partners with other organisations to provide Healthline (a free 24x7 health advice helpline), Outreach Therapy Pets and PRIME (a programme that uses the skills of specially-trained rural GPs and/or rural nurses to support the St John Ambulance Service during medical emergencies in remote areas). St John provides medical services for a number of events of all sizes, from international sports matches to community fairs. In the year ending 30 June 2012, St John attended 8,945 events. The St John Medical Alarm service is designed to help people live independently for longer. The alarm is a pendant which is worn around the neck or wrist. If the person has an accident or feels unwell or at risk they can press the emergency button on the alarm. St John immediately calls the person, speaking through a loudspeaker in the alarm’s base unit. If the person does not answer, an ambulance is dispatched. St John is a charitable organisation which relies on its volunteer workforce to deliver health services to the New Zealand population. Volunteers outnumber paid employees by around three to one. In 2012, St John 8,591 people volunteered for St John and the organisation had 2,481 paid staff. If the St John volunteer contribution was valued at normal commercial rates it would equate to $30 million. St John volunteers receive specialised training and clinical education. Contracts with the Ministry of Health, ACC and District Health Boards fund just under 80% of the direct operating costs of the St John ambulance service. The difference is made up from community and corporate donations, fundraising, revenue from commercial activities (first aid kits, first aid training, medical alarms and defibrillators), as well as income from emergency ambulance part charges. These activities also fund the delivery of non-ambulance services such as the St John Youth programmes, Friends of the Emergency Department, Hospital Friends, Caring Caller, St John Safe Kids and Outreach Therapy Pets. In 2008, St John and ASB Bank initiated a partnership. The partnership helps to expand support for St John services and deliver programmes like CPR training on a wide scale. At the same time, the partnership gives ASB the opportunity to strengthen connections with local communities and give their employees the opportunity to get involved with community services by volunteering for St John. The partnership was launched with ASB providing the opportunity for 1,000 school children at 10 schools to learn the lifesaving resuscitation skill CPR for free. St John in New Zealand has global links to the international Order of St John. Her Majesty the Queen is Sovereign Head of the Order and the Governor-General of New Zealand is the head or Prior of St John in New Zealand. In 1888, in recognition of its work, Queen Victoria made the Order of St John a Royal Order of Chivalry. In New Zealand, Royal Honours continue to be awarded to members for outstanding contributions and commitment to care for their communities. These Royal Honours are an independent part of the New Zealand Honours System. Honours are conferred annually at St John investiture services. A branch of the St John Ambulance was first founded in Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1885. Further branches quickly spread across the country providing first aid and patient transport and in 1946, due to the efforts of St John in New Zealand during the Second World War, the organisation was elevated to a full Priory, with the Governor-General of New Zealand as the Prior. During the 1970s and 1980s much restructuring took place in response to changing social and economic conditions, moving away from the traditional militaristic structure and resulting in the current modern organisation. Today, St John New Zealand is a major health service provider in New Zealand. They provide 90% of the emergency and non-emergency ambulance coverage for the New Zealand population, emergency care and first aid at public events, support phonelines for the elderly and house-bound, hospital patient transport, public first aid training, health products and a youth programme. 
