 Stefan Philip Kruszewski is an American clinical and forensic psychiatrist. He is a thrice successful Qui tam relator. He is principal in the company which bears his name, Stefan P. Kruszewski, M.D. & Associates, P.C. According to his website’s mission statement, Kruszewski says “that medical care is a public trust and that medical practice is an enormous responsibility. Unchecked special interest and commercial bias in medical research have undermined both.” As a fraud investigator for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 2003, Kruszewski uncovered the abuse and medical mistreatment of children and the mentally ill in residential treatment centers, and was eventually fired for trying to expose what he had discovered. Kruszewski brought suit for First Amendment claims against the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and in June 2007 he was awarded a settlement. Also resulting, Kruszewski filed his first Qui tam lawsuit which settled in 2009 against Southwood Psychiatric Hospital. He has been a relator in two additional successful Qui tam lawsuits: the first against Pfizer for its drug Geodon which settled in October 2009,<ref name="Deming">Deming, Tavy and Brian Kenney. AstraZeneca Pays $520 Million to Settle Seroquel Whistleblower Claims [Online]. PRWeb. 28 Apr 2010[Accessed 17 Jul 2011]. Available at: http://www.prweb.com/releases/2010/04/prweb3937374.htm<ref name="Duff">Wilson, Duff. "Side Effects May Include Lawsuits."[Online]. The New York Times. 2 Oct 2010[Accessed 18 Jul 2011]. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/03/business/03psych.html?sq=kruszewski&st;=cse&adxnnl;=1&scp;=1&adxnnlx;=1311017427-KiqB MKPXBpWIPBZssV3pw&pagewanted;=1 Stefan P. Kruszewski, M.D. was born in Queens County, New York and raised in Nassau County, New York and San Antonio, Texas. His offices and home are currently in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania where he lives with his family. His main avocation is oil painting. His father, Marion Martin Kruszewski, was a dentist in Maspeth, New York. His mother, Frances Joan, was an academic professional artist who exhibited in New York City and studied at the New School for Social Research and Art Students League of New York with American artists Robert Brackman, George Tschamber, Marian Brown, Paul Puzinas, Edgar Albert Whitney, Anthony Toney, Barbara Vassilieff, George Cherepov and Will Barnet. Kruszewski is a graduate of the Wheatley School in Old Westbury, New York; Princeton University in Princeton, New Jersey; and Harvard Medical School in Boston, Massachusetts. He completed post-doctoral education at Harvard Affiliate New England Deaconess Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Rutgers University/the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway and New Brunswick, New Jersey; and Duke University, Durham, North Carolina. He has been board certified in general psychiatry as well as having been certified in the subspecialties of geriatric, adolescent and addiction psychiatry and, by the American Society of Addiction Medicine, in addiction medicine. Kruszewski has over 30 years of clinical and teaching experience in the field of psychiatry, with particular focus on addictionology, neuropsychiatry and neuropharmacology. He has had academic appointments at Harvard Medical School, the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Rutgers University/the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Allegheny General Hospital System, University of North Texas, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and, most recently, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Kruszewski is a forensic specialist and has worked with both plaintiff and defense litigation. He has testified as an expert witness in a range of cases involving antipsychotic medications), antidepressant medications, analgesic medications (including opioids), and a range of psychiatric illnesses. Kruszewski has been recognized as a “distinguished expert” by senior federal judge, the Honorable Jack B. Weinstein, United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York (June 2007). He has been recognized as a psychiatric expert by the Honorable Patti B. Saris and testified in the Federal Daubert hearings in US District Court of Massachusetts (May 2009). Honorable Judge Rhonda E. Fischer has also accepted and affirmed expert testimony by Kruszewski in the Frye Hearings in District Court of the County of Nassau, New York State (Jan-May 2009). Kruszewski is a published author of letters, reviews, brief reports, editorials and full articles in peer-reviewed journals and respected news sites, including: BMJ, American Journal of Psychiatry, Neurology, Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), The New England Journal of Medicine, Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, International Journal of Safety and Risk in Medicine, Journal of Medical Licensure and Discipline, and others. His publications have covered a variety of topics, including: conflicts of interest for medical researchers, legal and political topics related to medicine, problem side effects that have been under-emphasized or misrepresented in previous scientific literature, alternative treatment options, prescribing practices and influences, restoring trust to medical research and scientific literature, drug treatment for the recovering addict, and other issues. Kruszewski is a three-time successful whistleblower, with settlements from suits brought against Southwood Psychiatric Hospital, Pfizer, Inc., and AstraZeneca. Kruszewski became aware of inadequate care and the exploiting of state-committed mentally ill children through overmedication and physical and chemical restraints while working for the Department of Public Welfare, Bureau of Program Integrity for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. When he refused to keep silent about his discoveries, he was fired from his position at the state. Kruszewski won settlements for both a First Amendment case against the state of Pennsylvania as well as his first Qui tam lawsuit against the hospital. In the cases against pharmaceutical giants, Pfizer and AstraZeneca, Kruszewski highlighted clinical science that was misrepresented by the defendants in their marketing and promotion of certain drugs. He also demonstrated problems with off-label marketing (marketing that promotes uses, patients or doses that are not approved by the US FDA) which resulted in heightened, but often non-transparent, risk to the health of patients and exceptional costs to taxpayers and state and federal governments. {{Persondata | NAME = Kruszewski, Stefan P. | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH =| PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
