 Steven Blankaart (24 October 1650, Middelburg – 23 February 1704, Amsterdam), was a Dutch physician, Iatrochemist, and entomologist, who worked on the same field as Jan Swammerdam. Blankaart proved the existence of a capillary system, as had been suggested by Leonardo da Vinci, by spouting up bloodvessels, though he failed to realize the true significance of his findings. He is known for his development of injection techniques for this study and for writing the first Dutch book on child medicine. Blankaart translated works of John Mayow. Steven was the son of Nicolaas Blankaart, a professor in Greek and History in Steinfurt (1645–1650) and Middelburg (1650–1666), who moved to Heerenveen to become the physician of Albertine Agnes; he was appointed in Franeker in 1669. His son started as an apprentice of an apothecary. In 1674 he moved to Amsterdam after becaming a doctor of Philosophy and Medicine at the University of Franeker. Blankaart followed the principles established by René Descartes and was one the first physicians to be a scientist or empiricist. In order to disprove the theory that insects originated spontaneously from filth and to demonstrate that they developed from eggs, Blankaart repeated the experiments carried out by Francesco Redi. Blankaart used oil made from turpentine to save the insects from mites, and mentioned it in his book "Schou-burg" from 1688. Blankaart corresponded with the mystical writer Antoinette Bourignon. He argued in one letter that an earthly paradise would created if there were a prohibition of alcohol. He collaborated with Maria Sibylla Merian on the publication of her work. In 1682 he had married Isabella de Carpentier, the daughter of a referent from Amersfoort and in 1683 they had one child. At that time he lived on Warmoesstraat. Blankaart was one of the first to do research on children's education and incontinence. Blankaart was a follower of Franciscus Sylvius, who recommended copious quantities of tea and coffee. and worked on syphilis. Blankaart was living in the Leidsestraat when he died; he was buried in the Westerkerk. {{Persondata | NAME = Blankaart, Steven | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 24 October 1650 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH = 23 February 1704 | PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
