 Stuart Gitlow (born November 29, 1962), board-certified in general, forensic, and addiction psychiatry, is the Executive Director of the Annenberg Physician Training Program in addictive diseases and Acting President of the American Society of Addiction Medicine. Gitlow has earned MD, MPH, and MBA degrees. He serves as a medical expert to the Social Security Department's Office of Disability Adjudication and Review and is on the faculty of Dartmouth Medical School and New York City's Mount Sinai School of Medicine. Author of Substance Use Disorders: A Practical Guide, Dr. Gitlow is also a regular columnist for Counselor and has authored numerous chapters in textbooks of Addiction Medicine. He is on the editorial board of the Journal of Addictive Diseases. Gitlow is an Aviation Medical Examiner for the Federal Aviation Administration. A native of New York, Gitlow studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he received his undergraduate degree. He went on to receive his MD from Mount Sinai School of Medicine, his Master's in public health from the University of Pittsburgh and his Master's in business administration from the University of Rhode Island. His postgraduate medical training was at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and at Harvard University. Dr. Gitlow lectures extensively within the field of addictive disease, teaching in the past at: Dr. Gitlow currently holds the following positions: While in medical school, Dr. Gitlow started LaserBoard, a BBS based in Manhattan for Macintosh users. LaserBoard eventually became Mac Symposium, a service on MacNET. This was a national proprietary online service that subsequently evolved into the now-defunct Connect Business Information Network. Dr. Gitlow then moved to America Online, eventually as Coordinator of the Macintosh division of the Computing Channel. Upon receiving funding from AOL to launch a new enterprise, he started Healant, the company that provided the [[Addiction & Recovery Forum]], Depression Forum, Alternative Medicine Forum and the Pain Relief Forum on AOL. Healant was also responsible for building websites and online communities of numerous health information companies, including drkoop.com. {{Persondata | NAME =Gitlow, Stuart | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = November 29, 1962 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
