 A synovial joint, also known as a diarthrosis, is the most common and most movable type of joint in the body of a mammal. As with most other joints, synovial joints achieve movement at the point of contact of the articulating bones. Structural and functional differences distinguish synovial joints from cartilaginous joints (synchondroses and symphyses) and fibrous joints (sutures, gomphoses, and syndesmoses). The main structural differences between synovial and fibrous joints are the existence of capsules surrounding the articulating surfaces of a synovial joint and the presence of lubricating synovial fluid within those capsules (synovial cavities). Synovial joints contain the following structures: Many, but not all, synovial joints also contain additional structures: The bone surrounding the joint on the proximal side is sometimes called the plafond, especially in the talocrural joint. A damage to this occurs in a Gosselin fracture. The blood supply of a synovial joint is derived from the arteries sharing in the anastomosis around the joint. The movements possible with synovial joints are: There are six types of synovial joints. Some are relatively immobile, but are more stable. Others have multiple degrees of freedom, but at the expense of greater risk of injury. In ascending order of mobility, they are: Name Example Description Gliding joints (or planar joints) carpals of the wrist, acromioclavicular joint These joints allow only gliding or sliding movements Hinge joints elbow (between the humerus and the ulna) These joints act as a door hinge does, allowing flexion and extension in just one plane Pivot joints atlanto-axial joint, proximal radioulnar joint, and distal radioulnar joint One bone rotates about another Condyloid joints (or ellipsoidal joints) wrist joint (radiocarpal joint) temporomandibular joint A condyloid joint is where two bones fit together with an odd shape (e.g. an ellipse), and one bone is concave, the other convex Saddle joints Carpometacarpal or trapeziometacarpal joint of thumb (between the metacarpal and carpal - trapezium), sternoclavicular joint Saddle joints, which resemble a saddle, permit the same movements as the condyloid joints Ball and socket joints"universal Joint" shoulder (glenohumeral) and hip joints These allow for all movements except gliding Compound joints / modified hinge joints knee joint condylar joint (condyles of femur join with condyles of tibia) and saddle joint (lower end of femur joins with patella) <references></references> 
