 Taking Control of your Diabetes (TCOYD) is a non-profit (501(c)3) educational organization founded in 1995 based in Del Mar, California. They put on Health care conferences around the United States, open to anyone who wants to learn more about diabetes. Away from conferences, they publish videos on the University of California's TV station, UCTV. Dr. Steven V. Edelman, MD, who has lives with type 1 diabetes since age 15, founded the non-profit educational organization in 1995, intending to educate diabetics on how to live healthily with the disease Over the 15 years of the organizations existence, it has put on over 100 conferences in many cities including San Diego, Seattle, Providence, Albequerque, and many more. Most of the conferences have over 50 health exhibits. TCOYD has partnered with UCTV (University of California TV) to produce its very own television series. On the series, experts discuss health issues and give tips on how to stay healthy. Special guests often appear on the show, Chef Robert Lewis The Happy Diabetic www.happydiabetic.com, and former Biggest Loser fitness trainer Kim Lyons and Open wheel car racer Charlie Kimball. The organization recently launched a new online reality series titled, "Extreme Diabetes Makeover," which follows seven people with poorly controlled diabetes who, with the help of a "dream team" of diabetes professionals, will take back control and improve their condition. Founder Steve Edelman has been very busy since the conception of TCOYD, being a contributor to the American Diabetes Association, he is a professor of medicine at the University of California, he is the Director of Affairs at the Diabetes Care Clinic Veteran Affairs Medical Center, and caters to over 4,000 diabetic patients. He has given over 1000 speeches, he had written many books and publications, and frequently appears on television. He was awarded by the American Diabetes Association the 2009 Outstanding Educator in Diabetes Award. The organization's conferences have been recognized to have top physicians, exhibits with state-of-the-art tools for diabetic management. 
