 Teenage Cancer Trust is a charity that focuses on the needs of teenagers and young adults with cancer, leukaemia, Hodgkin’s and related diseases by providing specialist teenage units in NHS hospitals. The units are dedicated areas for teenage and young adult patients, who are involved in their concept and creation. Medical facilities on the units are colourful and vibrant environments, equipped with computers, TVs, game consoles – designed to be places where friends and family feel comfortable to visit. To date, the charity has built 25 units in London, Leeds, Liverpool, Birmingham, Sheffield, Newcastle, Manchester, Glasgow, Southampton, Edinburgh, Cardiff, Bristol, Cambridge, Hull, Leicester, Nottingham and Wirral. The charity also serves as an advocate for teenage cancer needs, becoming instrumental in the establishment of related research and national and international forums. It also provides support services and education related to teen cancer. The idea for the charity grew by chance, out of the eagerness of a group of women to organise a fashion show to fund a children's intensive care heart unit at Guy's Hospital, London. Established in 1990, the charity’s work has expanded dramatically. As well as an Education and Awareness team with a schools programme providing information, education and advice that reaches pupils all over the UK, the charity funds and organises a forum for professionals to ensure information and best practice sharing. It sponsors a teenage conference, Find Your Sense of Tumour, an International Conference on Cancer and the Adolescent and have just appointed the world’s first Professor of Adolescent Cancer Medicine. Each day in the UK, 6 teenagers will find out they have cancer. That is over 2,200 new diagnoses each year. In many cases, cancer in teens is not picked up early enough and symptoms are dismissed as growing pains or sports injuries. Because teenagers are undergoing growth spurts, their cancers grow faster than other age groups and they can be at greater risk. Cancer is the most common cause of non-accidental death in teens and young adults in the UK. By the age of 15 teens have a 1 in 600 chance of developing cancer. By the age of 24 young adults will have had a 1 in 285 chance of developing cancer. In the last 30 years the incidence of cancer in the teenage and young adult group has increased by 50% and for the first time ever, the number of teens with cancer now exceeds the number of children with cancer. The Teenage Cancer Trust was registered as a charity in the United Kingdom on 29 May 1997, and holds registration number 1062559 (England & Wales) and SC039757 (Scotland). Today the organisation operates from offices in West London, with an annual income of around £6½M a year. Presidents of the charity are Dr Adrian Leon Whiteson OBE and Myrna Nita Whiteson MBE. The trustees of the charity are David Hoare (Chairman), Susie Foottit, Diane Margaret Freedman, Dr John Matlin, Ronnie Harris, Alan Patten, Richard Barry Rosenberg and Marc Woods. The patrons of the charity are Sarah, Duchess of York and Roger Daltrey. Roger Daltrey and Pete Townshend of rock band The Who have been intimately involved with the annual charity concerts at Royal Albert Hall. Daltrey has endorsed 'The Whodlums', a Who tribute band based in North East England, which regulalry raises money for the Trust. Some of the many others who have been involved include Ash, Noel Gallagher, Kasabian, suede, Stereophonics, Glenn Tipton, McFly, Ronnie Wood, Chris Martin, The Specials, Muse, The Fratellis, Noel Fielding, Russell Brand, Paul Weller, Them Crooked Vultures, Steve Cradock, Duffy, Arctic Monkeys, Bullet for my Valentine, Florence and the Machine, VV Brown, Antony and the Johnsons, Seth Lakeman, Kate Rusby, Fairport Convention, Fightstar, The Blackout, Depeche Mode, Tinie Tempah, Jessie J, Biffy Clyro, Editors, Beady Eye, One Direction and Mathew Horne and James Corden. Other celebrities who have supported the charity are Joe McElderry, Frank Lampard, Holly Willoughby, Gerald Scarfe, Jameela Jamil, Jorgie Porter and Harry Judd. The line-up for the charity's 2013 shows at the Royal Albert Hall features Ryan Adams, Beth Orton, Russell Brand, Noel Fielding, Primal Scream, Echo and the Bunnymen, Kasabian, Dark Horses, Noel Gallagher, Damon Albarn, Graham Coxon, Gruff Rhys, Rizzle Kicks, Labrinth, Paul Weller and Palma Violets. Giles Long MBE, the triple Paralympic gold medallist and TV presenter was treated at the very first Teenage Cancer Trust unit at the Middlesex Hospital in London from October 1991 to March 1992 for a bone tumour. He appeared briefly on stage with The Who at the Royal Albert Hall, along with Marc Woods in November 2000. It was the first Who concert in the UK for over twenty years and the first of many fundraisers by the band for the TCT. He continues to raise money for the charity and visits patients. Corporate supporters include Home Retail Group which includes Argos and Homebase, Nomura, TOPMAN, Coffee Republic, Sony, MandMDirect plus many more [1] Teenage Cancer Trust was Arsenal F.C.'s "charity of the season" 2008/09 and Arsenal F.C. have been involved with the trust for many years. A ninety second television advertisement called 'Do What I Say' was made by advertising agency Brothers and Sisters and featured nine of the Arsenal squad - Manuel Almunia, Cesc Fàbregas, Kolo Touré, William Gallas, Eduardo da Silva, Johan Djourou, Gaël Clichy, Emmanuel Adebayor, Bacary Sagna, and was voiced by comedian and Arsenal fan Matt Lucas. Neil Austin will be attending. 
