 Teleophthalmology is a branch of telemedicine that delivers eye care through digital medical equipment and telecommunications technology. Today, applications of teleophthalmology encompass access to eye specialists for patients in remote areas, ophthalmic disease screening, diagnosis and monitoring; as well as distant learning. Teleophthalmology enables health professionals to take ocular images and attend to patients who have limited access to ocular health care. These images allow the ophthalmologist, health care professionals and researchers to carry out the aforementioned applications. The required equipment includes a camera that can take ocular images and a computer terminal with network capabilities, which can transfer the images. There has been a significant increase in teleophthalmology research over the past decade. However, differences in health information exchange standards, data security, liability issues, and cost of equipment are other major challenges in teleophthalmology. Although ocular photography has been present since the early 1980s, the transfer of digital images from one location to another for assessment is a relatively recent phenomenon. The rise of digital imaging in the early 1990s allowed ophthalmologists to capture images and store them on computers for future assessment. The advent of the Internet allowed for the digital transfer of these ocular images from one location to another. Current teleophthalmological solutions are generally focused on a particular eye problem, such as diabetic retinopathy, retinopathy of prematurity, macular degeneration, strabismus and adnexal eye diseases. Less common conditions that can be revealed using retinal images are arterial and vein occlusions, chorioretinitis, congenital anomalies, and tapetoretinal abitrophy. Several population-based studies have used retinal imaging to relate ophthalmic abnormalities to general conditions, including hypertension, renal dysfunction, cardiovascular mortality, subclinical and clinical stroke, and cognitive impairment. Mobile applications are widely available in ophthalmology as tools for eye tests (visual acuity, colour test, and viewing eye images) and for educational purposes. Technological advancements in digital ocular imaging devices are perceived by many as key drivers for teleophthalmology. Recently, emerging retinal imaging modalities such as optical coherence tomography are capable of producing digital images of the retina with a micrometer resolution, which can be transmitted for research or diagnostic purposes. Along with systems designed for health care professionals, patient-centred systems such as Eye-File for use by the general public are emerging. Fundus photography is performed by a fundus camera, which basically consists of a specialized low power microscope with an attached camera. Teleophthalmology services can be provided primarily in two ways synchronously or asynchronously: Images of the eye can be captured non-invasively through various methods, generally by a technician or non-physician health care professional. Mydriasis (pupil dilation, e.g. using tropicamide) may be required to obtain an image of sufficient quality. Stereoscopy may be used to detect retinal thickening. The image can then be transferred, over the Internet or dedicated network to a physician for immediate examination, or for storage and later review. Ideally, the image is encrypted or anonymized for transmission, to protect patient confidentiality. Between image capture and viewing, image processing may be done, including compression, enhancement and edge-detection.Image evaluation, to detect various pathologies in the case of asynchronous evaluation, is often done by an ophthamologist or primary care physician, though it is also performed by specially trained staff. Image evaluation may also be automated to provide pathology detection or grading. Computer software applications have been tasked with the automated assessment of retinal images to recognize lesions associated with an ocular disease of interest. The clinical process entails initially discriminating retinal lesions from non-factor artifacts, subsequently distinguishing lesions associated with the disease in question from other types of lesions, and finally grading the disease according to guideline-endorsed severity scales set by medical authorities. Dedicated research in artificial intelligence drives the underlying technology in automated image recognition. Specific approaches involve pattern recognition using trained artificial neural networks; feature extraction using edge-detection and region-growing techniques; and content-based comparison with previously adjudicated samples. The United States Department of Veterans Health Affairs was one of the first organizations to deploy a large-scale teleretinal imaging program starting in 1999. In 2006, this program was expanded and received further funding for a nationwide program. As of 2010, more than 120,000 patients have been screened through the program. EyePACS is an example of a license-free Web-based software with the aim of facilitating communication between primary care and eye care clinicians for treatment, recommendation and follow-up. The digital images can be taken and uploaded to an online repository where they are evaluated by certified readers. These images are then sent to the primary care physician or ophthalmologist. By 2009, the EyePACS program was expanded to over 120 primary care sites in California. In Canada, a number of ocular health screening programs focused on rural population screening were implemented. In the United Kingdom, more than 1.7 million people with diabetes were screened using digital fundus photography in 2010 and 2011.A pilot project with telemedicine transmission of retinal OCT images from community optometry care has been of merit. www.bit.ly/teleophthalmology Since 2001, more than 30,000 people with diabetes have been screened since 2001 as part of a project called EyeCheck in the Netherlands. Between 2006 and 2008, a large scale teleretinal screening project using mobile units was implemented in China. Teleophthalmology relies on a standard for the representation, storage, and transmission of medical images known as Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM). The medical imaging standard is managed by the Medical Imaging & Technology Alliance (MITA), which is a division of the Virginia-based National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA). Various regulations exist on national levels that govern the use of teleophthamological solutions. Some of them are listed below: Emerging techniques for eye image capture include ophthalmoscopes that can be combined with mobile devices, increasing portability and accessibility to the general public. The introduction of full auto focusing retinal cameras has the potential to reduce the need for operators. Telehealth networks are growing in number, and advancements are being made in automated detection methods for diseases such as diabetic retinopathy. Teleophthalmology has the potential to improve access to screening and early treatment for a number of ocular conditions. It serves to identify patients who are at risk of various types of retinopathy and allows further evaluation and early management resulting in considerable economic benefit. Despite ongoing research and advancement in digital photography, digital imaging techniques still face certain barriers, including low sensitivity and specificity, as well as lack of stereopsis (impression of depth). As such, teleophthalmology cannot be a true substitute for comprehensive eye examinations using traditional binocular observation with standard 7-field stereoscopic fundus photography. Automated image recognition algorithms are gaining in clinical adoption. While they perform at a level nearly equivalent to humans in ascertaining low and high risk states, diagnosis and grading performance is still insufficient for clinical acceptance. 
