 The Center for Health and Health Care in Schools (CHHCS), located within the George Washington University School of Public Health and Health Services, is a nonpartisan policy analysis and program-development research center that builds on a 25-year history of testing strategies to strengthen school-connected health care delivery systems for children and adolescents. Since the early 1980s, in collaboration with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and other partners, CHHCS has developed model interventions and technical assistance resources to support the development of school-connected prevention and care programs for students in K–12 schools. In its earlier work CHHCS was known as the School-Based Adolescent Health Care Program National Program Office (1987–1992) and the Making the Grade National Program Office (1993–2000). CHHCS’s mission is to strengthen the well-being of children and youth through effective health programs and services in schools. In addition to developing new models for school-connected programs, CHHCS explores organizational and financing challenges associated with taking programs to scale. School-based Health Centers: Quality improvement and financing strategies to sustain and expand School-Based Health Centers, in addition to providing practical resources to school-based health centers directly. School Behavioral and Mental Health: Program development, sustainability and quality improvement; associations between social emotional learning and education success. School Health-Education Partnerships: Identifying strategies to build support at the state and federal levels for early intervention programs at school. School Health Services and Health Care Reform: Examining the role of school health programs in a universal health care environment. School Nursing: Role in management of chronically ill children. Children’s Oral Health: Developing school-connected preventive and treatment services for underserved populations. Vulnerable Populations: Increasing access to care through school health programs for high need populations, including children from low-income families, immigrant and refugee children, and children from communities burdened by health and other disparities. CHHCS provides technical assistance and other analytical services to a variety of public and private agencies in support of continued development of school-based health programs. Projects include advising state foundations on challenges and opportunities for school-based health centers under health care reform, technical assistance to schools across the country in the support of school-based health centers or initiatives, and assessing options for expanding school nurse programs. CHHCS has also been a part of the process for assessing financial and state policy data on school-based health centers across the country. CHHCS research papers are published in peer-reviewed journals as well as posted as reports to the CHHCS web site. The Weekly Insider, provides information on grant opportunities, school health news, resources, and upcoming meetings. Social-emotional learning at school and the intersection between state and federal policies and local programs; children’s oral health and options for school-based care; health care reform and school-based care; chronic-disease management and school health services. 
