 The Perth Group is a group of AIDS denialists based in Perth, Western Australia who claim, in opposition to the scientific consensus, that HIV infection does not cause AIDS. The group has affected the epidemic of HIV/AIDS in South Africa through the impact of their work on South African President Thabo Mbeki's AIDS policies. In 2007 the testimony of several members was thrown out of court during the trial of an HIV-positive man charged with reckless transmission of HIV. While overall membership has changed, the core members of the group are biophysicist technician Eleni Papadopulos-Eleopulos, emergency physician Valendar F. Turner and pathologist John Papadimitriou. The group claims it was founded in 1981. Members of the group work at Royal Perth Hospital, though the relationship is disputed. Papadopulos-Eleopulos has been described as a technician at the hospital, while Turner and Papadimitriou are faculty members. The hospital has declaimed any relationship to the Group's beliefs, and made a point of stating Papadopulos-Eleopulos does not work with AIDS patients or conduct any research on HIV. AIDS researcher Seth Kalichman, author of a book on AIDS denialism, described the group's claims as confusing and inconsistent, using complicated explanations and rhetorical techniques to "sound scientific" in their incorrect assertions regarding research on HIV and AIDS. The group acknowledges that AIDS exists, but denies that it is caused by HIV infection, producing a list of ten positions that attempts to criticize the established science that HIV causes AIDS. Instead, the group attributes AIDS deaths to on oxidative damage caused by factors unrelated to viral infection, such as drug use, homosexual activity between men (primarily exposure to semen), poverty and the medications used to treat AIDS. Kalichman notes that although oxidation does have an impact on the immune system, none of the processes claimed by the Perth Group cause AIDS, whose cause has been definitively identified as HIV infection. The group also denies that the causative agent of AIDS is transmitted through heterosexual sexual activity. The group has also denied that the human immunodeficiency virus itself exists, claiming to offer a $20,000 reward for anybody who can produce evidence for its existence. Peter Duesberg, an AIDS denialist who claims HIV exists but is harmless, refuted their claims and provided evidence of the existence of HIV, but the group did not provide the money. Writing in the Skeptical Inquirer, professor of economics and the director of the AIDS and Society Research Unit at the University of Cape Town Nicoli Nattrass suggested that their beliefs may in part be due to misunderstanding of the science involved. Members of the Perth Group attempted to testify at the trial of Andre Chad Parenzee, an Australian man charged with endangering human life after having unprotected sex with three women despite knowing he was HIV-positive, but the supreme court judge threw out their claims as "implausible." Robert Gallo, co-discoverer of HIV, testified at the trial and noted that Turner, who had also testified, had incorrectly claimed HIV was identified through the activity of reverse transcription when in fact it was identified through the presence of the reverse transcriptase enzyme, stating that '"only a fool" would mistake the two'. Gallo pointed out during the trial that Turner lacked any credibility to testify during the trial regarding HIV infection as he lacked any qualifications as a virologist and conducted no research in the field. Gallo later stated in an e-mail that he was amazed at the Perth Group's "mass ignorance coupled with the grandiosity of selling themselves as experts". Australian Research biologist Gustav Nossal, along with several other Australian scientists, gave evidence during the trail and described the group as '"a very considerable embarrassment" to Australian science'. The Perth Group's claims have also been cited in controversies about HIV/AIDS in South Africa, and were influential in the positions held by South African President Thabo Mbeki regarding HIV/AIDS in the country. Papadopulos-Eleopulos and Turner were panelists in the Presidential AIDS Advisory Panel established by Mbeki. 
