 Treatments under investigation may improve function, curtail attacks, or limit the progression of the underlying disease. Many treatments already in clinical trials involve drugs that are used in other diseases or medications that have not been designed specifically for MS. There are also trials involving the combination of drugs that are already in use for multiple sclerosis. Finally, there are also many basic investigations that try to understand better the disease and in the future may help to find new treatments. Disease-modifying drugs and procedures represent possible interventions able to modify the natural course of the disease instead of targeting the symptoms or the recovery from relapses. Over a dozen clinical trials testing potential therapies are underway, and additional new treatments are being devised and tested in animal models. Phase III programs consist of studies on large patient groups (300 to 3,000 or more) and are aimed at being the definitive assessment of how effective and safe a test drug will be. It is the last stage of drug development and is followed by a submission to the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., European Medicines Agency (EMEA) for the European Union, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the USA, Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) for Australia, etc.) to obtain approval for marketing. Treatment in MS phase III studies is usually 2 years per patient. Phase II studies are performed on mid-sized groups of patients (20 to 300) and are designed to assess whether a drug may work in the targeted disease area, as well as to continue earlier safety assessments obtained in healthy volunteers. Treatment in MS phase II studies is with 4–12 months usually shorter than in phase III studies. Phase I and medicaments used in animal models would make a huge list. Here only some of them with special interest are listed. The frequency of new enhancing lesions as detected by Gd-enhanced MRI was reduced by more than half in 12 patients, comparing the six-month run-in phase to the six-month post BCG phase of the experiment. Persistence at subsequent MR scan was reduced from 18 to 1 lesion, and evolution to black holes was reduced from 28 to 6 lesions. The conventional explanation of such protection is that parasites (including bacteria) modulate the sensitivity of the immune system. BCG appears safe as a treatment for multiple sclerosis. Several combinations of drugs have been tested. Some of them are couples of approved drugs. Other tests try one approved drug with one experimental substance. Finally, at some point there could appear some trials testing couples of non-approved drugs. Summarizing in a table which combinations have been tried: Progressive variants have proved more difficult to treat than RRMS. This is the status of the research into progressive variants. Highly Active Relapsing Remitting, sometimes called Rapidly Worsening relapsing remitting, is a clinical form considered distinct from standard RR during clinical trials, being normally non responsive to standard medication. As of 2011, fingolimod has been approved as the first disease modifying therapy for this clinical course. Cyclophosphamide is currently used off-label for Rapidly Worsening MS (RWMS). This variant does not have any approved treatment currently. Some possible treatments have been published, such as methylprednisolone pulses or riluzole, and some reduction of spasticity was reported in a pilot Italian study on low dose naltrexone but there is nothing conclusive still. A Statin, Simvastatin (Zocor), has shown good results in progressive variants Only Mitoxantrone has been approved, but most of the previous pipeline drugs have been or will be tried on it at some point. 
