 The third ventricle (ventriculus tertius) is one of four connected fluid-filled cavities comprising the ventricular system within the human brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). It is in the midline, between the left and right lateral ventricles. Running through the third ventricle is the Interthalamic adhesion, fibers which connect the two thalami. It communicates with the lateral ventricles anteriorly by the interventricular foramina (of Monro). It communicates with the fourth ventricle posteriorly by the cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius). The third ventricle, similarly to other parts of the ventricular system of the brain, develop from the central canal of the neural tube. Specifically, the third ventricle originates from the portion of the tube that is present in the developing prosencephalon, and subsequently in the developing encephalopathy. It is bounded by the thalamus and hypothalamus on both the left and right sides. The lamina terminalis forms the anterior wall of the third ventricle. There are two protrusions on the anterior aspect of the third ventricle: Additionally, there are two protrusions on the posterior aspect, above the cerebral aqueduct: In casts of the ventricular system, a small 'hole' may be seen in the body of the third ventricle. This is formed where the two thalami are joined together at the interthalamic adhesion (not seen in all people). The Third Ventricle Hypothesis of depression proposes that the behavioural cluster associated with depression (hunched posture, avoidance of eye contact, reduced appetites for food and sex plus social withdrawal and sleep disturbance) serves to reduce an individual’s attack provoking stimuli within the context of a chronically hostile social environment. It further proposes that this response is mediated by the acute release of an unknown (probably cytokine) inflammatory agent into the third ventricular space. In support of this suggestion imaging studies reveal that the third ventricle is enlarged in depressives which is indicative of damage-induced loss of volume in the structures surrounding it (Hendrie & Pickles, 2010 ). See The Third Ventricle Hypothesis of Depression for more detail. 
