 The Toronto Western Research Institute (TWRI) is a non-profit academic medical research institute located in Canada’s largest city, Toronto. The TWRI is one the principal research institutes of the University Health Network of academic teaching hospitals associated with the University of Toronto; the TWRI is also one of the largest research institutes in Canada focussing on human neurological disease from both a basic science and clinical research perspective. Research within the TWRI is directed at the development of treatments for neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease), epilepsy, stroke, brain tumours, concussions, spinal cord injuries, neurophthalmologic and other ocular disorders, multiple sclerosis and autoimmune disorders. The University Health Network (UHN) is Canada’s largest academic medical centre, comprising four major teaching hospitals (Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto General Hospital, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute) and a strategic alliance with the Toronto Mount Sinai Hospital. The TWRI is the research institute of the Toronto Western Hospital and fulfils the mandate for neuroscience (including ophthalmology) and musculoskeletal health research within the UHN academic medical centre. In total, UHN devotes C$160 million a year to research and trains more than 3,200 undergraduate, graduate and medical students at its member hospitals and institutes in association with the University of Toronto. The University of Toronto is Canada's largest university and one of the biggest in North America, consistently ranking in the top 25 universities internationally in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, the Academic Ranking of World Universities and the QS World University Rankings. In 1895, twelve physicians in the west end of Toronto united to create the Toronto Western Hospital (TWH, or the “Western”) in order to serve an overlooked culturally-diverse neighbourhood in Toronto. The Toronto Western Hospital first opened as a medication dispensary, followed by a 30-bed general hospital temporarily functioning out of two rented houses. By 1899 sufficient money was raised to purchase a nearby farmhouse and to build the Western on its present site. During construction, patients were treated year-round under large tents until the hospital officially opened in 1905. Throughout the 20th century, the Toronto Western Hospital functioned as a general hospital serving clients from culturally- and economically-diverse backgrounds. In the early 1980s, the Western took on additional neurological and neurosurgical care responsibilities for the UHN group of hospitals. Concomitant with this new clinical care focus, strength in applied neuroscience research began to emerge. In 1980, the Playfair Neuroscience Institute was created at the TWH to capitalize on this evolving neuroscience focus. In 1999, the Playfair Neuroscience Institute was renamed the Toronto Western Research Institute as it joined the Toronto General Research Institute and the Princess Margaret Research Institute as the three main hospital-based institutes within UHN. After this change, the TWRI also took on additional areas of research interest including ophthalmology, rheumatology and orthopaedics. By 2004, under the founding leadership of neurosurgeon Dr. C. Wallace, the TWRI had emerged as on the of the largest research institutes in Canada with a neuroscience emphasis. TWRI scientists are at work on a diverse array of human healthcare questions within multiple research programs. At the TWRI, neuroscientists explore the function of the nervous system as they develop treatments for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, spinal cord injuries, cerebral ischemia (stroke), vascular brain malformations, aneurysms, brain tumours and pain disorders. TWRI is also home to the Vision Science Research Program, a joint UHN/University of Toronto Program. This research is directed into the following areas: molecular genetics of blinding eye diseases with brain disorders; treatment and biophysics of glaucoma; eye movement control mechanisms; neuronal damage; retinal degeneration and diabetic retinopathy. Arthritis and associated rheumatological degenerative diseases are the focus of the researchers in the musculoskeletal research program at the TWRI as part of the UHN Arthritis and Autoimmunity Research Centre. Their investigations are aimed at revealing the causes of, and generating therapies for, these autoimmune and orthopaedic ailments. 1980-1988 – William Tatton 1988-1990 – Charles Tator (interim) 1990-1999 – Peter Carlen 1999-2004 – Christopher Wallace 2004-2011 – Peter St George-Hyslop 2011-2013 – Peter Carlen (interim) Christopher Wallace MD, MSc, FRCSC, a neurosurgeon and neurophysiologist, was the first official director of the TWRI; his research focussed on therapeutic approaches to vascular brain injury. Peter St George-Hyslop MD, PhD, FRCPC, a neurologist and PhD geneticist, was the second full-time director of the TWRI; his research focussed on the genetic basis of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s dementia. Since its inception, the TWRI has been co-located with the Toronto Western Hospital at the corner of Bathurst Street and Dundas Street West in Toronto, Canada. Within this location, the TWRI occupies 105,000 sq. ft. (9,755 sq. meters) dedicated to a full range of basic science, clinical, imaging and epidemiological research. In 2013, the TWRI expands into an additional 325,000 sq. ft. (30,195 sq. meters) of space, spanning nine floors, in the newly constructed Krembil Discovery Centre attached to the TWH. The Krembil Discovery Centre space includes 150,000 sq. ft. (13,935 sq. meters) of “wet” laboratory bench space for TWRI basic science researchers. In 2011, the TWRI was home to 122 biomedical researchers, 206 technical/support staff and 157 research trainees, who collectively produced 515 peer-reviewed publications supported by more than $43,612,000 of external research funding. In addition to conventional peer-review funding, the TWRI receives support from the Toronto General/Toronto Western Hospital Foundation which is currently embarked upon a $200 million “Brain Campaign” to support neuroscience research within the TWRI. The TWRI has many strategic research alliances, nationally and internationally, to facilitate and enhance the delivery of its research mandate. Two of the notable strategic research alliances are as follows: University Health Network 
