 Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) is a medical laboratory test that measures the blood's capacity to bind iron with transferrin. It is performed by drawing blood and measuring the maximum amount of iron that it can carry, which indirectly measures transferrin since transferrin is the most dynamic carrier. TIBC is less expensive than a direct measurement of transferrin. The TIBC should not be confused with the UIBC, or "unsaturated iron binding capacity" ( and ). The UIBC is calculated by subtracting the serum iron from the TIBC. Taken together with serum iron and percent transferrin saturation clinicians usually perform this test when they are concerned about anemia, iron deficiency or iron deficiency anemia. However, because the liver produces transferrin, alterations in function (such as cirrhosis, hepatitis, or liver failure) must be considered when performing this test. It can also be an indirect test of liver function, but is rarely used for this purpose. The percent transferrin saturation (i.e., the result of the formula of serum iron/TIBC x 100) can also be a useful indicator. Condition Serum iron Transferrin and TIBC Percent transferrin saturation iron deficiency anemia Low High. The liver produces more transferrin, presumably attempting to maximize use of the little iron that is available. Low, as there is insufficient iron. anemia of chronic disease Low, as the body holds iron intracellularly with ferritin. Low. The body produces less transferrin (but more ferritin), presumably to keep iron away from pathogens that require it for their metabolism. This is mainly regulated by increased hepcidin production. Normal pregnancy or use of hormonal contraception, but without iron deficiency Normal High. The liver increases the production of transferrin, thus raising TIBC. Low, as there is excess transferrin with normal serum iron levels. These examples demonstrate that to properly understand a value for TIBC, one also must know the serum iron, the percent transferrin saturation, and the individual clinical situation. Normal reference ranges are: g/dL = micrograms per deciliter; μmol/L = micromoles per litre. Laboratories often use different units and "normal" may vary by population and the lab techniques used. Look at the individual laboratory reference values to interpret a specific test (for instance, your own). 
