 Transurethral resection of the prostate (commonly known as a TURP, plural TURPs, and rarely as a transurethral prostatic resection, TUPR) is a urological operation. It is used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). As the name indicates, it is performed by visualising the prostate through the urethra and removing tissue by electrocautery or sharp dissection. This is considered the most effective treatment for BPH. This procedure is done with spinal or general anaesthetic. A triple lumen catheter is inserted through the urethra to irrigate and drain the bladder after the surgical procedure is complete. Outcome is considered excellent for 80-90% of BPH patients. BPH is normally initially treated medically. This is done through alpha antagonists such as Flomax or alpha-1A reductase inhibitors such as Proscar and Avodart. If medical treatment does not reduce a patient's urinary symptoms, a TURP may be considered following a careful examination of the prostate/bladder through a cystoscope. If TURP is contraindicated a Urologist may consider: a simple prostatectomy, in and out catheters, or a supra-pubic catheter to help a patient void urine effectively. As medical management of BPH improves, the numbers of TURPs have been decreasing. See Prostatectomy#Transurethral_resection_of_the_prostate_(TURP) for details of monopolar TURP, bipolar TURP and laser prostate surgery. Because of bleeding risks associated with the surgery, TURP is not considered safe for many patients with cardiac problems. Postoperative complications include Effect of short-term finasteride therapy on peroperative bleeding in patients who were candidates for transurethral resection of the prostate (TUR-P): a randomized controlled study Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Diseases (2005) 8, 215–218. doi:10.1038/sj.pcan.4500818; published online 5 July 2005 pubmed 15999118 http://www.nature.com/pcan/journal/v8/n3/full/4500818a.html Ming-xiong,TANG Zheng-yan,SU Jian,et al. Effect of Finasteride on Perioperative and Postoperative Bleeding Following Transurethral Resection of Prostate http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTOTAL-SYYY200903092.htm DOI CNKI:SUN:SYYY.0.2009-03-092 or flutamide. Additionally, transurethral resection of the prostate is associated with a low risk of mortality. 
