 Trench Foot is a medical condition caused by prolonged exposure of the feet to damp, unsanitary, and cold conditions. It is one of many immersion foot syndromes. The use of the word trench in the name of this condition is a reference to trench warfare, mainly associated with World War I. Affected feet may become numb, affected by erythrosis (turning red) or cyanosis (turning blue) as a result of poor vascular supply, and feet may begin to have a decaying odour due to the possibility of the early stages of necrosis setting in. As the condition worsens, feet may also begin to swell. Advanced trench foot often involves blisters and open sores, which lead to fungal infections; this is sometimes called tropical ulcer (jungle rot). If left untreated, trench foot usually results in gangrene, which can cause the need for amputation. If trench foot is treated properly, complete recovery is normal, though it is marked by severe short-term pain when feeling returns. As with other cold-related injuries, trench foot leaves sufferers more susceptible to it in the future. Unlike frostbite, trench foot does not require freezing temperatures and can occur in temperatures up to 60° Fahrenheit (about 16° Celsius). The condition can occur with as little as thirteen hours' exposure. The mechanism of tissue damage is not fully understood. Excessive sweating or hyperhidrosis has long been regarded as a contributory cause. Trench foot can be prevented by keeping the feet warm and dry. It was also discovered in World War I that a key preventive measure was regular foot inspections by officers. Soldiers would be paired and each made responsible for the feet of the other. If left to their own devices soldiers might unwisely decide to forgot the task of taking off their boots and socks to dry their feet each day, but if it were the responsibility of another this became less likely. Later on in the war, the time the soldiers had to stay in the trenches was decreased to prevent trench foot. Trench foot was first noted in Napoleon's army in 1812. It was during the retreat from Russia that it became prevalent, and was first described by French army surgeon Dominique Jean Larrey. It was a particular problem for soldiers in trench warfare (apropos to the name) during the winters of World War I, World War II, and the Vietnam War. Trench foot made a reappearance in the British Army during the Falklands War, in 1982. The causes were the cold, wet conditions and insufficiently waterproof DMS boots. Some people were even said to have developed trench foot at the 1998 and 2007 Glastonbury Festivals, 2009 Leeds Festival and 2012 Download Festival as a result of the sustained cold, wet, and muddy conditions at the events. 
