 Trevena Inc is a privately held biopharmaceutical company, headquartered in King of Prussia, PA, specializing in the discovery and development of targeted therapeutics for G protein coupled receptors. Trevena was founded with technology licensed from Duke University, which originated in the labs of company founders Robert Lefkowitz and Howard Rockman. Trevena's innovative approach to drug discovery is based on utilizing ligand bias, or functional selectivity, at GPCR targets to produce drugs with improved efficacy and reduced side effect profiles. In 2008, the company raised $25 Million in a Series A financing round led by Alta Partners, Polaris Ventures, New Enterprise Associates, Healthcare Ventures, and Yasuda Economic Development Corporation. Trevena was named one of the top 15 US startups of 2008 by Business Week. The company raised an additional $35 million USD in a B round of venture financing in the summer of 2010. Trevena's lead program, TRV027 for acute heart failure, targets the angiotensin receptor utilizing beta-arrestin bias, an approach that has shown numerous beneficial cardiovascular and renal actions in preclinical species. Trevena completed Phase I clinical trials in 2010. Phase 2 clinical trials on TRV027 began in the spring of 2011. Trevena's drug discovery pipeline also includes various stage programs focusing on the CNS, inflammation, and oncology supportive care. In early 2009, Trevena entered into a collaborative agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals to identify biased ligands at numerous GPCRs from a large, diverse chemical library. Later that year, Trevena received a competitively awarded American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Grand Opportunities Grant, spanning two years and funding $7.65 million USD of research. The company has disclosed specific interests in the mu Opioid receptor and kappa Opioid receptor. In 2011, Treveva received another NIH grant as part of the NIH Blueprint Neurotherapeutics Network, potentially worth up to $10M USD, to support preclinical development of a delta opioid receptor biased ligand for major depressive disorder. 
