 Trinity Health is a US-wide Catholic health network of 44 acute-care hospitals, 379 outpatient centers, 26 long-term care facilities, and numerous hospice programs and senior living communities in Michigan, Iowa, Indiana, Maryland, Ohio, Idaho and California. Headquartered in Novi, Michigan, Trinity Health is the fourth-largest Catholic health system in the United States based on total revenue. Trinity Health has 44,500 full-time staff and more than 8,000 active physicians. It is sponsored by the Sisters of Mercy, West Midwest Community, and the Congregation of the Sisters of the Holy Cross. Many Catholic healthcare providers do not provide contraception, sterilisation, or abortion services. Trinity Health provides more than US$300 million a year in programs serving the poor and under-served, and in charity care. In 2008 Trinity Health had commitments of more than $376 million. Trinity Health supports reform of the US healthcare system. Saint Agnes Medical Center, Fresno Saint Alphonsus Regional Medical Center, Boise Loyola University Health System, MaywoodMercy Health System, Chicago Saint Joseph Regional Medical Center, South Bend Mercy Medical Center - ClintonMercy Medical Center - DubuqueMercy Medical Center - North Iowa, Mason CityMercy Medical Center - Sioux City (The Iowa organizations are members of Mercy Health Network, which is a joint operating arrangement between Trinity Health and Catholic Health Initiatives.) Holy Cross Hospital, Silver Spring Saint Joseph Mercy Health System, Ann ArborMercy Hospital, CadillacChelsea Community Hospital, ChelseaSaint Mary's Health Care, Grand RapidsSt. Joseph Mercy Livingston, HowellMercy Hospital, GraylingSt. Mary Mercy Hospital, LivoniaMercy Health Partners, MuskegonSt. Joseph Mercy Oakland, PontiacSt. Joseph Mercy Port Huron, Port HuronSt. Joseph Mercy Saline, Saline Mount Carmel Health System, Columbus Trinity Senior Living CommunitiesTrinity Home Health Services A typical member of Trinity Health, Saint Joseph Mercy Health System (SJMHS) of Ann Arbor, says on a Web entry: "As a Catholic organization, SJMHS prohibits its staff from dispensing or prescribing contraceptives and from performing vasectomies, female sterilizations, and elective abortions." Trinity Health's physicians and nurses use computerized clinical tools to automate processes, including: , 22 community hospitals within Trinity Health's integrated health delivery network had computerized clinical and revenue-management applications. The organisation carries out advocacy based on the belief that the US health care system should provide everyone with access to health coverage and high-quality care. Through its "Find a Way" campaign, Trinity Health and its partner organizations contend that health reform is a key ingredient of economic recovery, and that all lawmakers should work urgently toward a goal of "coverage and access for all Americans in a cost-effective system of care." Trinity Health organises town hall events, visits to Capitol Hill and meetings with local legislators as part of the US health care discussion. Trinity Health president and CEO Joseph R. Swedish issued a call for comprehensive health reform in a column titled "Our Carpe Diem Moment: Execs, Clinicians Must Help Policymakers Find the Way to Universal Coverage", published in Modern Healthcare on April 28, 2008. Trinity Health was formed by merging Holy Cross Health System and Mercy Health Services in 2000. Holy Cross Health System has its roots in the Congregation of the Sisters of the Holy Cross, founded in 1841 by Father Basil Anthony Moreau. During the Civil War, Holy Cross Sisters helped staff military hospitals, caring for the wounded of both North and South. Over the next 100 years, the Sisters opened hospitals and other healthcare facilities throughout the country, responding to the needs of the times. In 1979 Holy Cross Health System was formed to unite the health care organizations sponsored by the Congregation of the Sisters of the Holy Cross. In 1831, Catherine McAuley founded the Sisters of Mercy in Dublin, Ireland. Over the next 10 years, she and her Sisters established 14 foundations to serve the poor, the sick and the uneducated throughout Ireland and England. After McAuley's death in 1841, the Sisters of Mercy took their mission to America, where they founded hospitals, schools, and orphanages, and established homes for women and girls at risk. The Sisters of Mercy Regional Community of Detroit traces its roots to convents, schools and hospitals founded as early as the 1860s and 1870s in Iowa and Michigan. In 1976, the Sisters created a health system, eventually called Mercy Health Services, to link and better support their hospitals. 
