 The Ty Cobb Healthcare System began as only a single hospital. Cobb Memorial Hospital was dedicated in Royston, Georgia, on January 22, 1950, to the glory of God and in loving memory of Ty Cobb's parents, William Herschel Cobb and Amanda Cobb. Ty Cobb donated $100,000 toward the construction of the modern 24-bed hospital designed to meet the health care needs of the people of his hometown and surrounding rural northeast Georgia. The Royston Record described the new facility as "one of the most modern and best equipped hospitals that has been built under the Hill Burton (Federal Act) in the state of Georgia," containing "the latest equipment... that could be bought." The 63-year-old, ex-basestealer, who parlayed his baseball earnings into a fortune in Coca-Cola stock, Ty Cobb donated $100,000 to help his hometown of Royston, Georgia, build a 24-bed hospital, fitted with the latest equipment. The institution was initially run by Cobb's boyhood friend, Dr. Stewart Brown. The original Board of Directors of the proposed hospital held their organizational meeting at the home of Dr. and Mrs. Stewart Brown, Sr. on November 6, 1947. Dr. Brown, a widely respected physician and surgeon, served as Cobb Memorial Hospital's first superintendent. Ty Cobb Healthcare System is a private self-supporting nonprofit health care organization consisting of Cobb Memorial Hospital, Cobb Memorial Outpatient Diagnostic Center, Brown Memorial Convalescent Center, Cobb Health Care Center, Home Base Health Services, Hart County Hospital, and Cobb Center Apartments, Inc. Ty Cobb Healthcare System Incorporated announced on June 10, 2009, that it would close down Cobb Memorial Hospital and Hart County Hospital and consolidate them into a new $52 million, 56-bed, regional medical center in nearby Lavonia, Georgia, called Ty Cobb Regional Medical Center. Ty Cobb Healthcare System applied to the state Department of Community Health in mid-July for formal permission to build the new hospital. If the state grants a certificate of need quickly, construction could begin by the end of 2009 and the new hospital could be completed and operational in 2011. Cobb Memorial Hospital is a hospital in Royston, Georgia, founded by baseball legend Ty Cobb in honor of his parents. This 71-bed medical and surgical facility includes a modern birthing center, a 24-hour emergency department, and a state of the art Outpatient Diagnostic Center. As the first entry into the Ty Cobb Healthcare System, Cobb Memorial Hospital was made possible by Ty Cobb’s gracious donation of Coca-Cola stock then valued at $100,000. From that donation, there now exists the “hospital that was built with a bat.” Ty Cobb made the contribution in order to honor his parents, Herschel and Amanda Cobb. Today, Cobb Memorial Hospital is a 71-bed medical and surgical facility with a six-bed Intensive Care Unit, a modern birthing center, outpatient services and surgery, and physician-staffed 24-hour emergency department. Additionally, Cobb Memorial Hospital maintains a durable medical equipment (DME) company known as Home Base Health Services. The new Outpatient Diagnostic Center enables the community to utilize radiology, laboratory, and even respiratory services at the hospital in an outpatient format. With tests performed by local medical experts at the hospital, the facility will speed up testing procedures for patients. Hart County Hospital is an 82-bed, full-service hospital that serves Hart, Franklin, and Elbert counties and the surrounding areas. Fully accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO), the hospital has over 83 doctors, 200 support staff members, and a 24-hour emergency department. Many of Hard County Hospital's services have been scaled back over the years. For example, Hart County Hospital no longer practices Labor & Delivery, leaving pregnant women of Hart County to go to Cobb Memorial Hospital in nearby Royston, or to other outlying facilities to give birth. Hart County Hospital recently opened a new Emergency Department. It has a triage room, 5 general care bays, and one Trauma bay. Also, patients arriving on their own discretion now have a separate entrance than patients that are transported by ambulance. Before the new Emergency Department opened, all ED patients used one entrance. The old entrance had a raised concrete stoop for ambulances to back up to, so EMTs could unload patients. Along the side of the concrete stoop was a ramp for pedestrians and handicapped patients. This emergency entrance has since been demolished. Presently, patients going to the Hart County Hospital Emergency Department on their own discretion use an entrance at the hospital's front side on Gibson Street. Patients transported by ambulance are brought in a separate entrance located on the hospital's west side on Cade Street. Brown Memorial Convalescent Center is a 144-bed hospital-based long term care facility located adjacent to Cobb Memorial Hospital in Royston, Georgia. Hartwell Health Care Center is a 92-bed hospital-based long term care facility located in Hartwell, Georgia. Cobb Health Care Center is a 116-bed hospital-based long term care facility located in Comer, Georgia. The Gables at Cobb Village is a 48-bed special residential community serving senior adults with assisted living services. Cobb Center Apartments, Inc. is a 24-unit HUD independent living housing project owned by Ty Cobb Healthcare System. 
