 UC San Diego Health System is an academic health system in San Diego and has been in operation since 1966. It is composed of UC San Diego Medical Center, Thornton Hospital, Moores Cancer Center, Shiley Eye Center, Sulpizio Cardiovascular Center and Jacobs Medical Center (opening in 2015), as well as other primary and specialty practices of UC San Diego Medical Group located throughout southern California. The Medical Center and Thornton Hospital operate under one license with a combined licensed capacity of 552 beds. The mission of UC San Diego Health System is to provide excellent and compassionate patient care, advance medical discoveries and educate the health care professionals of tomorrow. The Medical Center houses the UC San Diego Stroke Center, the area’s only Regional Burn Center and is one of only two Level I Trauma Centers in San Diego County. It includes a Level III neonatal intensive care unit and is the only hospital-based Birth Center in the area. UC San Diego Medical Center for the 17th year in a row has been named as the best in the nation by US News and World Reports in five specialty areas in 2010-2011. UCSD Medical Center was ranked 11th in Pulmonology, 21st in Psychiatry, 22nd in [[Diabetes & Endocrionology]], 45th in Orthopedics and 46th in Geriatrics.UC San Diego Health System has been widely recognized for its health care services. UC San Diego Medical Center was named among the best in the nation by US News and World Report in 2007 in six specialty areas. UCSD Medical Center ranked 8th in respiratory disorders, 18th in rheumatology, 30th in kidney disease, 30th in gynecology, 39th in cancer, and 50th in ear, nose, and throat. In 2009, the UC San Diego Medical Center once again was named among the best in the nation by US News and World Report in six specialty areas. UC San Diego Medical Center ranked 14th in respiratory diseases, 20th in psychiatry, 21st in rheumatology, 39th in urology, 43rd in kidney diseases, and 47th in cancer. The UC San Diego Medical Center, Hillcrest (), is the primary hospital for the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine. The region's only academic medical center offers both primary care and specialized services, including a full range of surgery, diagnosis and management of genetic disease, neurology, orthopedics, oncology, and the Sleep Medicine Center. The recently renovated 386-bed hospital at UC San Diego Medical Center, Hillcrest, is also the primary site for such regional services as the Comprehensive Organ Transplant Program,Bone Marrow Transplantation, San Diego Regional Burn Center, Infant Special Care Center (NICU), UCSD's Birth Center, San Diego County's only academic Level One Trauma Center, and the National Institutes of Health-designated Clinical Research Center. The John M. and Sally B. Thornton Hospital and Perlman Ambulatory Care Center () opened in the summer of 1993. John Alksne, a neurosurgeon and the Dean of the School of Medicine, performed the first surgery at this hospital. It was a delicate brain operation. It is located on the UCSD campus in La Jolla, California. It is a 119-bed general medical-surgical facility that offers a full range of services, including surgery, cardiology, endocrinology, neurology, orthopedics, oncology, reproductive medicine, pulmonary medicine and physical therapy. Thornton Hospital has a hotel-like atmosphere and patients staying in the intermediate care wing of the hospital can order room service meals at any time of the day. Established in 1979, the Rebecca and John Moores UCSD Cancer Center is one of just 39 National Cancer Institute-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers in the United States. Such centers are prominent among the leading institutions in the nation dedicated to scientific innovation and clinical excellence. UCSD is the only Comprehensive Cancer Center in San Diego and Imperial counties to have earned this honor. In 2007, US News and World Report ranked the UCSD Medical Center 39th in the nation for cancer treatment. The UCSD Shiley Eye Center provide comprehensive eye care services, from basic eye exams to advanced diagnostic tests and sophisticated surgery. Eye care services offered at UCSD Shiley Eye Center include cataract surgery, cornea transplants, glaucoma diagnosis and treatment, low vision services, neuro-ophthalmology, optometry and contact lens service, pediatric ophthalmology, plastic surgery, refractive surgery, retina care, and trauma repair. The Abraham Ratner Children's Eye is immediately adjacent to Shiley and is the only eye facility in the San Diego region dedicated to meeting the special vision needs of children. As part of the La Jolla Campus construction. UC San Diego Health Systems is planning to open the new facility, which will provide ambulatory, clinical, and inpatient heart and stroke care in one central location. As part of providing health care to all areas of the county with the opening of the Sulpizio Cardiovascular Center to residents in Northern Part of San Diego. UCSD Health Systems opened in November 2010, the North Coastal Cardiology Clinic was opened in Encinitas, CA On May 18, 2007, the UC Regents approved a plan to build an additional 125- to 150-bed inpatient tower in La Jolla. On November 19, 2010, the UC Regents approved a plan to build a new building for Clinical and Translational Institute (CTSI). This building is planned to have 311,000 gross square feet at a cost of $269 million. 
