 Ultrasonic sensors (also known as transceivers when they both send and receive, but more generally called transducers) work on a principle similar to radar or sonar which evaluate attributes of a target by interpreting the echoes from radio or sound waves respectively. Ultrasonic sensors generate high frequency sound waves and evaluate the echo which is received back by the sensor. Sensors calculate the time interval between sending the signal and receiving the echo to determine the distance to an object. This technology can be used for measuring: wind speed and direction (anemometer), tank or channel level, and speed through air or water. For measuring speed or direction a device uses multiple detectors and calculates the speed from the relative distances to particulates in the air or water. To measure tank or channel level, the sensor measures the distance to the surface of the fluid. Further applications include: humidifiers, sonar, medical ultrasonography, burglar alarms and non-destructive testing. Systems typically use a transducer which generates sound waves in the ultrasonic range, above 18,000 hertz, by turning electrical energy into sound, then upon receiving the echo turn the sound waves into electrical energy which can be measured and displayed. The technology is limited by the shapes of surfaces and the density or consistency of the material. Foam, in particular, can distort surface level readings. An ultrasonic transducer is a device that converts energy into ultrasound, or sound waves above the normal range of human hearing. While technically a dog whistle is an ultrasonic transducer that converts mechanical energy in the form of air pressure into ultrasonic sound waves, the term is more apt to be used to refer to piezoelectric transducers that convert electrical energy into sound. Piezoelectric crystals have the property of changing size when a voltage is applied, thus applying an alternating current (AC) across them causes them to oscillate at very high frequencies, thus producing very high frequency sound waves. The location at which a transducer focuses the sound can be determined by the active transducer area and shape, the ultrasound frequency, and the sound velocity of the propagation medium. The example shows the sound fields of an unfocused and a focusing ultrasonic transducer in water. Since piezoelectric crystals generate a voltage when force is applied to them, the same crystal can be used as an ultrasonic detector. Some systems use separate transmitter and receiver components while others combine both in a single piezoelectric transceiver. Non-piezoelectric principles are also used in construction of ultrasound transmitters. Magnetostrictive materials slightly change size when exposed to a magnetic field; such materials can be used to make transducers. A capacitor microphone uses a thin plate which moves in response to ultrasound waves; changes in the electric field around the plate convert sound signals to electric currents, which can be amplified. Medical ultrasonic transducers (probes) come in a variety of different shapes and sizes for use in making pictures of different parts of the body. The transducer may be passed over the surface of the body or inserted into a body opening such as the rectum or vagina. Clinicians who perform ultrasound-guided procedures often use a probe positioning system to hold the ultrasonic transducer. Air detection sensors are used in various roles. Non-invasive air detection capabilities in the most critical applications where the safety of a patient is mandatory. Many of the variables, which can affect performance of amplitude or continuous wave based sensing systems, are eliminated or greatly reduced, thus yielding accurate and repeatable detection. The principle behind the technology is that the transmit signal consists of short bursts of ultrasonic energy. After each burst, the electronics looks for a return signal within a small window of time corresponding to the time it takes for the energy to pass through the vessel. Only signals received during this period will qualify for additional signal processing. Ultrasonic sensors are used to detect the presence of targets and to measure the distance to targets in many automated factories and process plants. Sensors with an on or off digital output are available for detecting the presence of objects, and sensors with an analog output which varies proportionally to the sensor to target separation distance are commercially available. They can be used to sense the edge of material as part of a web guiding system Ultrasonic sensors are gaining popularity in a number of uses including ultrasonic people detection and assisting in autonomous UAV navigation. Because ultrasonic sensors use sound rather than light for detection, they work in applications where photoelectric sensors may not. Ultrasonics are a great solution for clear object detection, clear label detection and for liquid level measurement, applications that photoelectrics struggle with because of target translucence. Target color and/or reflectivity don't affect ultrasonic sensors which can operate reliably in high-glare environments. Other types of transducers are used in commercially available ultrasonic cleaning devices. An ultrasonic transducer is affixed to a stainless steel pan which is filled with a solvent (frequently water or isopropanol) and a square wave is applied to it, imparting vibrational energy on the liquid. 
