 The United States Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC) is the United States Army's medical materiel developer, with responsibility for medical research, development, and acquisition and medical logistics management. The USAMRMC's expertise in these critical areas helps establish and maintain the capabilities the U.S. Army needs to fight and win on the battlefield. USAMRMC Headquarters at Fort Detrick, Maryland, supports 11 subordinate commands located throughout the world. Six USAMRMC medical research laboratories and institutes perform the core science and technology (S&T;) research to develop medical solutions. These laboratories specialize in various areas of biomedical research, including infectious diseases, combat casualty care, operational medicine, clinical and rehabilitative medicine, chemical and biological defense, combat dentistry, and laser effects. The laboratories are staffed with highly qualified scientists and support personnel. A large extramural research program and numerous cooperative research and development (R&D;) agreements provide additional S&T; capabilities by the leading R&D; organizations in the civilian sector. Five USAMRMC subordinate commands perform medical materiel advanced development, strategic and operational medical logistics, and contracting, to complete the lifecycle management of medical materiel. About 6,000 military, civilian, and contractor personnel are assigned to support the Headquarters and subordinate units. Officers, enlisted Soldiers, and civilians-many of whom are among the most respected and knowledgeable specialists in their fields-provide subject matter expertise in medical, scientific, and technical areas throughout the Command. Medical information and products developed by USAMRMC protect and sustain the health and safety of the force through deployment and combat. The USAMRMC motto, "Protect, Project, Sustain," emphasizes the Command's priorities in support of the warfighter. In March 1994, a merger of Medical Research and Development Command, the United States Army Medical Materiel Agency and the Health Facilities Planning Agency resulted in creation of the Medical Research, Development, Acquisition and Logistics Command (MRDALC), subordinate to the then provisional MEDCOM. The MRDALC was soon renamed the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (USAMRMC). At Fort Detrick: Elsewhere: 
