 Aberdeen University Medical School is a school of the College of Life Sciences and Medicine at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland. Medicine has been taught at the university since the founding of King's College in 1495. Indeed, the university has been described as the first medical school in Scotland and even the English speaking world. Nevertheless, this assertion has been called into question as medical teaching already existed at St. Andrews, Oxford and London and even as late as 1787 there were calls "for the establishment of a medical school" in Aberdeen. As of 2008 the Medical School takes 162 British students per year and an additional 13 from overseas. The School of Medicine and Dentistry is made up of three divisions: Today, the school is based in the newly built Suttie Centre for Teaching & Learning on the Foresterhill site in Aberdeen. The main teaching hospitals are Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen Maternity Hospital, the Royal Aberdeen Children's Hospital, Woodend Hospital and the Royal Cornhill Hospital. Teaching is also provided in Inverness, mainly at Raigmore Hospital and in Elgin at Dr Gray's Hospital, as well as at various other hospitals in the Highlands and Islands. The current Dean of the School is Professor Michael Greaves, a Consultant Haematologist. There are two active Regius Professorships, the Regius Chair of Medicine and Regius Chair of Surgery. The Regius Chairs of Midwifery and Anatomy are in abeyance. The University of Aberdeen offers undergraduate courses in medicine (MB ChB), dentistry (BDS) and a BSc programme in Health Science. Postgraduate degrees are offered as taught courses, generally leading to the degree of Master of Science (MSc), and as research degrees either at a master's (MSc, MRes, ChM) level or at doctoral (PhD, MD) level. The course structure at Aberdeen was recently updated and some of the details here may be inaccurate, especially for the earlier years of the course. In common with other Scottish medical schools, Aberdeen offers a five-year programme, leading to the award of the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery, MB ChB. Most teaching is traditional and didactic and problem-based learning is used rarely, unlike in Glasgow. The course is divided into four Phases, detailed below. There is also the opportunity to undertake a further year of study to gain a BSc (Hons) in Medical Science. Year 1: Fundamentals of Medical Sciences After a short Basic Science in Medicine course including lectures in physiology and biochemistry, lecture courses and anatomy sessions on each different system address all normal aspects. These are complemented by practical sessions. The Community Course takes place one morning a week. Small groups of students are taught at local general practices and encounter the many services for ensuring health in the community. For example, pairs of students visit a family with a newborn at home. The Communications Course involves small group tutorials and role play in the Clinical Skills Centre. A 4 week Student Selected Component allows small groups to choose from a wide range of healthcare topics, carry out in-depth research and report and present their findings. In Phase I students begin to acquire understanding of the medical sciences which underpin medicine, the skills for effective self learning, and professional communication and attitudes appropriate to the profession. Year 2 & two thirds of Year 3: Principles of Clinical Medicine After an introductory Principles of Disease course, lecture courses on each different system (gastrointestinal, respiratory etc.) address all abnormal aspects, viz, diseases. The Community Course continues one morning a week but now the emphasis is on disease, disability and rehabilitation in the community. Two Medical Interviewing and Communications Courses involve small group tutorials, role play with ‘simulated patients’ including personal video sessions, in the Clinical Skills Centre. Clinical skills teaching and practice occur 2 mornings a week in the Clinical Skills Centre and the wards where students become adept at communication and clinical examination of patients. In two 4 week Student Selected Components, small groups choose from a wide range of topics on the molecular basis of medicine and then, population based disease. The groups carry out in-depth research, report and present their findings. In Phase II, students are introduced to the concept of diseases and their general effects on patients, along with basic aspects of their investigation and management. Year 3 (remaining third) & Year 4: Specialist Clinical Practice The phase begins with a Student Selected Component exploring ethical issues. The subsequent period consists of nine five-week clinical blocks organised partly by body system, e.g. alimentary or urinary, and partly by the ‘multi-disciplines’, Child Health and General Practice. During this phase students observe the theory from Phase II being put in to clinical practise in clinics and on wards and you will come into close contact with patients and relatives. In Phase III, students develop their diagnosis and management skills for both individual patients and patient populations of all ages, with medical conditions affecting any of the body systems. Year 5: Professional Practice Phase IV is very much an apprentice year where students prepare for the competent, safe, effective and professional practice of medicine as a Foundation House Officer. The phase comprises four courses. In these, students have the opportunity to explore clinical areas that are of particular personal interest, whilst practising under supervision, a range of core skills common to all areas of medical training. The remaining course is a project based elective on a medical topic, often undertaken overseas. The Division of Medical and Dental Education also offers an intercalated BScMedSci (Hons) in Medical Science, usually at the end of Phase II. The programme, which comprises both taught and research elements, is one year long and allows study in depth of an area of biomedical or clinical science. Appropriate training is provided. Each student works on an individual research project of their choice. By the end of the programme students are able to undertake and critically evaluate research and understand the basic principles of research methodology. Aberdeen Medsoc was a society set-up originally to bring medical students together in a social capacity. It is the oldest Aberdeen University Student Society and today has over 600 members. Annual social activities include Beerienteering, Medsoc Ball, Doctors v Medics Sports Day, Medsoc Revue and most recently a Fashion Show with proceeds going to a local children's charity. 
