 The University of Vermont College of Medicine is an American medical school located in Burlington, Vermont and associated with the University of Vermont (UVM). Established in 1822, it is the nation's seventh oldest medical school. The primary teaching hospital for the UVM College of Medicine is Fletcher Allen Health Care in Burlington. The UVM College of Medicine offers both MD and MD/PhD programs. In 2007, there were 431 medical and 23 MD/PhD students enrolled. Each class contains approximately 110 students; the entering class of 2015 contains 112 students. The school's medical curriculum is known as the "Vermont Integrated Curriculum". It has both traditional, subject-based and more contemporary, organ/system-based components. The first 18 months of the curriculum are devoted to basic and clinical science; the remainder of the four-year program largely consists of clinical clerkships. The institution is one of the ten most-selective medical schools in the United States, with an acceptance rate of 4.0% annually. The UVM College of Medicine offers both MD and MD/PhD programs. It enrolls approximately 100 students into the MD program, and four students into the MD/PhD program annually. According to the institution, the UVM College of Medicine offers an "integrated" medical curriculum. This curriculum, known as the "Vermont Integrated Curriculum", or "VIC", is separated into three levels. Level one/foundations is focused on basic and clinical sciences and lasts 18 months. Level two/clinical clerkships is a 12-month period spent rotating through various clinical clerkships at Fletcher Allen Health Care and Maine Medical Center. In level three/advanced integration, students continue rotating through clinical clerkships and acting internships with additional responsibilities. The UVM College of Medicine is highly ranked among American medical schools. For 2010, The University of Vermont College of Medicine was ranked by [[U.S. News & World Report]] as 4th on the "Top Medical Schools — Primary Care" list and 8th on the "Top Medical Schools — Rural Medicine" list. The UVM College of Medicine is affiliated with four teaching hospitals, with the primary affiliate being Fletcher Allen Health Care in Burlington, Vermont. A long-standing affiliation with Maine Medical Center in Portland, Maine began in the late 1970s but ended in February 2011. Three new hospitals took the place of MMC: Danbury Hospital in Danbury, Connecticut, Eastern Maine Medical Center in Bangor, Maine, and St. Mary's Hospital in West Palm Beach, Florida. 
