 The University of Central Florida College of Medicine is an academic college of the University of Central Florida located in Orlando, Florida, USA. The dean of the college is Deborah C. German, M.D. The college consists of a public medical school located on the UCF Health Sciences Campus in southeast Orlando within a 650-acre health and life sciences park known as Lake Nona Medical City. On March 23, 2006, the Florida Board of Governors voted 15-1 in support of UCF's proposal to build a medical college. The medical college will constitute a new UCF medical campus that is being constructed at Lake Nona, located on the eastern edge of Orlando near the Orlando International Airport. Upon completion of the first phase, the base of this medical college will include a building for the Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, a medical college instructional building and a library. In October 2005, a local Orlando investment company, the Tavistock Group, donated $12.5 million and of land to UCF to help establish the UCF Medical School at Lake Nona, and issued a challenge to the Orlando community to help the university raise an additional $12.5 million to boost the total amount of raised funds to $25 million. This $25 million would be eligible for a matching state grant, thus giving UCF the needed $50 million to create the medical college. UCF received well over $100 million in donations, state-matching funds, and land value for the medical college's establishment. The new College of Medicine offered an unprecedented full scholarship package to every member of its charter class, 41 students entering in Fall 2009. The scholarship, financed by various donors, amounts to $40,000 per year, half going to tuition (out-of-state fees being waived) and the other half for living expenses. Dean German spearheaded the effort to secure these scholarships, having herself received a similar scholarship at Harvard Medical School. The new school received over 4,300 applications, including at least one with a perfect MCAT score, making it at that time the most selective medical school in the United States. UCF's College of Medicine is located on the university's Health Sciences Campus in the Lake Nona neighborhood of Orlando. The 50 acre (.2 km<sup>2</sup>) campus, is located on the eastern edge of Orlando, and about 45 minutes from UCF's main campus. The medical city currently also serves as a home to UCF's Burnett Biomedical Sciences Building, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Nemours Children’s Hospital, M.D. Anderson Orlando Cancer Research Institute, a University of Florida Academic and Research Center and Valencia College at Lake Nona, and the Orlando Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VA). In the future, the campus will house UCF's College of Nursing and a teaching hospital. In addition, UCF plans to add a College of Dental Medicine in the next few years. The college will be built on the Health Sciences Campus, and has already been approved by the university's Board of Trustees. Other companies are also planning on building major medical research facilities in the area, with over $2 billion worth of projects awarded. M.D. Avg MCAT 32 Avg GPA 3.76 Out-of-State 25% Male/Female 44/56% Admission to the medical school is based mainly on GPA, Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) score, admissions essays, an interview, clinical work experience, and volunteering activities, along with research and leadership roles in the applicant's history. Background checks on applicants is required by the Association of Medical Colleges in order to prevent individuals with convictions for serious crimes from being matriculated. In 2011, over 3,000 students applied for 80 spots. Matriculates had an average GPA of 3.76, median MCAT score of 32, and were 25 years old. 19% of those admitted had previously earned a post-bachelorette degree. The medical school's curriculum began clinical education in Fall 2009, and the college is expected to produce about 120 medical graduates a year, starting with 41 students in the first class and increasing in subsequent years. Full accreditation has been granted to the medical school, and the college is currently accepting applications for the fifth class of 100 students for Fall 2013 enrollment. The medical school curriculum is four years long. The first two years are composed mainly of classroom basic sciences education, while the last two years primarily include rotations in clinical settings where students learn patient care firsthand. Clinical education is spread across all four years, with the final years being more heavily weighted towards clinical rotations. The four-year medical program capitalizes on UCF's existing strengths in biomedical sciences, modeling and simulation, and optics and photonics. Other programs in materials science, psychology, chemistry, film and digital media, and nursing will support the program. The Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences houses the Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, the Biomolecular Science Center, the Medical Laboratory Sciences Program and the Pre-Health Professions Advisement Office. The school offers three undergraduate degrees: a Bachelor of Science in Molecular Biology and Microbiology, a Bachelor of Science in Biotechnology, and a Bachelor of Science in Medical Laboratory Science. Two graduate degrees are also offered: a Master of Science in Molecular Biology and Microbiology and a Ph.D. program in Interdisciplinary Biomedical Science. In addition to these, the school also offers an accelerated Bachelors to Medicine program, in conjunction with the University of South Florida. Students complete three years at UCF, before matriculating into the University of South Florida College of Medicine. At the end of the program they are awarded a bachelor's degree in Molecular Biology and Microbiology, and a Medical Doctorate. The school was named after Al and Nancy Burnett after receiving a $10 million donation from them. The current director of the school is Dr. Pappachan E. Kolattukudy. In August 2007, the program was converted to a school under the newly formed UCF College of Medicine from being an independent college. The goal of the school is to build a nationally recognized biomedical research and education enterprise, and become part of UCF's College of Medicine upon accreditation. The Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences is housed in a building on the health sciences campus which opened in 2009. 
