 University of California, San Diego School of Medicine is a medical school located in La Jolla, California, USA. The school held its first class in 1968 and conferred its first degrees in 1972. The school aggressively recruited leading physician scientists of its era and rapidly gained a reputation as an elite medical school. The inaugural class in 1971 achieved the highest score in the country on the National Board of Medical Examiners Step 1 Examination, propelling the young School into the national spotlight. UCSD School of Medicine was ranked 15th in the 2009 edition of U.S. News and World Report for research. UCSD School of Medicine was ranked 35th in primary care. UCSD School of Medicine is ranked 5th in the nation among public medical schools by U.S. News and World Report – the youngest school among the top 5 public schools. UCSD School of Medicine faculty rank #1 in the nation in federal research funding per faculty member (#1 in clinical research and #3 in basic research). Among ranked departments, UCSD is #1 in Family Medicine, Neurosciences, Surgery, and #2 in Anesthesiology, Ophthalmology, Orthopedics, Pediatrics, Pharmacology, Psychiatry. UCSD School of Medicine is 15th in the nation in total NIH funding with 7 departments in the top 10 when ranked against peer departments. UCSD ranks 4th in the world in terms of 'citation impact' in the fields of science and social science, with world wide notable faculty. In individual categories, ISI ranks the School of Medicine 2nd in clinical medicine, 3rd in pharmacology, 4th in molecular biology and genetics, and 10th in psychology and psychiatry. Eight Nobel Laureates in Medicine: Other notable faculty include: Year One Year Two The Independent Study Project (ISP) has long been a cornerstone of the elective curriculum at the UCSD School of Medicine. Students are required to complete a project under the direction of an ISP committee usually consisting of three or more School of Medicine faculty. UCSD School of Medicine is affiliated with: Primary teaching hospitals affiliated with this medical school where clinical teaching or training is carried out: Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego Naval Regional Medical Center, San Diego VA Medical Center, Scripps Mercy Hospital, UCSD Medical Center. Most popular residency and specialty programs from the 2005 and 2006 graduating classes: anesthesiology, emergency medicine, family medicine, internal medicine, obstetrics and gynecology, ophthalmology, pediatrics, psychiatry, radiology, surgery. The UCSD Student-Run Free Clinic Project, in partnership with the community, provides accessible, quality health care for the underserved in respectful environments, in which students, health professionals, patients and community members learn from each other. It seeks to sustain health through: free medical and preventive care, health education and access to social service. 
