 The University of Tennessee College of Medicine is one of six graduate schools of the University of Tennessee Health Science Center (UTHSC) in downtown Memphis. The oldest public medical school in Tennessee, the UT College of Medicine is a LCME-accredited member of the American Association of Medical Colleges (AAMC) and awards graduates of the four-year program Doctor of Medicine (MD) degrees. The college's primary focus is to provide practicing health professionals for the state of Tennessee. The history of the University of Tennessee College of Medicine involves several institutional mergers. The Nashville Medical College was founded in 1876 and acquired by the University of Tennessee three years later. The Nashville Medical College moved to Memphis in 1911 and merged with the College of Physicians and Surgeons to become the University of Tennessee College of Medicine. Following a number of mergers with the biological science, nursing, and dental departments, the then-named University of Tennessee Medical Units was renamed the University of Tennessee Health Science Center during the tenure of Dr. Edmund Pellegrino. Today, the Humphrey's General Education Building (GEB) stands on the corner of Madison Avenue and Dunlap street, where Lindsley Hall formerly housed the College of Physicians and Surgeons. The oldest surviving building (built in 1926) of the current UTHSC campus is the Wittenborg Anatomy Building, named after Dr. August H. Wittenborg. The College of Medicine is affiliated with a number of teaching hospitals in Memphis, Knoxville, Chattanooga, and Nashville. The University of Tennessee Health Science Center forms the backbone of the Memphis Medical District and is closely affiliated with several medical units: The Chattanooga campus of the College of Medicine is closely affiliated with Erlanger Health System. In Knoxville, the University of Tennessee Medical Center is home to the UT Graduate School of Medicine, the largest of the nine (AAMC) Graduate Regional Medical Centers in the Southeast United States. Nashville UTHSC CoM affiliates include St. Thomas and Baptist Hospitals. Steve Schwab announced in 2013 that UTHSC aims to develop more clinical experiences for students in internal medicine, surgery, surgical sub-specialties (e.g., Anesthesiology and Radiology), family medicine, emergency medicine, and obstetrics and gynecology at these hospitals. UT medical students spend their first two years in Memphis completing basic science coursework prior to taking the USMLE Step 1. Then, students perform clinical rotations at these facilities on all three campuses for third and fourth year clerkships. The College of Medicine offers several Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education residency programs located at three statewide campuses: 
