 Vasculitis (plural: vasculitides) is a group of disorders that destroy blood vessels by inflammation. Both arteries and veins are affected. Lymphangitis is sometimes considered a type of vasculitis. Vasculitis is primarily due to leukocyte migration and resultant damage. Although both occur in vasculitis, inflammation of veins (phlebitis) or arteries (arteritis) on their own are separate entities. Vasculitis can be classified by the cause, the location, the type of vessel or the size of vessel. According to the size of the vessel affected, vasculitis can be classified into: Some disorders have vasculitis as their main feature. The major types are given in the table below: Comparison of major types of vasculitis Vasculitis !! Affected organs !! Histopathology Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis Skin, kidneys Neutrophils, fibrinoid necrosis Wegener's granulomatosis Nose, lungs, kidneys Neutrophils, giant cells Churg–Strauss syndrome Lungs, kidneys, heart, skin Histiocytes, eosinophils Kawasaki disease Skin, heart, mouth, eyes Lymphocytes, endothelial necrosis Buerger's disease Leg arteries and veins (gangrene) Neutrophils, granulomas "Limited" Wegener's vasculitis Commonly sinuses, brain, and skin Takayasu's arteritis, polyarteritis nodosa and giant cell arteritis mainly involve arteries and are thus sometimes classed specifically under arteritis. Furthermore, there are many conditions that have vasculitis as an accompanying or atypical symptom, including: Several of these vasculitides are associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. These are Possible symptoms include: Treatments are generally directed toward stopping the inflammation and suppressing the immune system. Typically, cortisone-related medications, such as prednisone, are used. Additionally, other immune suppression drugs, such as cyclophosphamide and others, are considered. In case of an infection, antimicrobial agents including cephalexin may be prescribed. Affected organs (such as the heart or lungs) may require specific medical treatment intended to improve their function during the active phase of the disease. Sturge–Weber syndrome 
