 The Victor Babeș University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timișoara (Romanian:Universitatea de Medicină și Farmacie "Victor Babeş", Timișoara) is located in Timişoara, Romania. The school was founded as a modest faculty on 30 December 1944, when King Michael I of Romania signed decree-law nr. 660,: "Art. 1. - The West University is founded on the date of publication of this hereby law, having the following faculties: Law, Literature and Philosophy, Sciences, Human medicine, Veterinary medicine, Pharmacology and Theology." The inauguration of the new university took place on 15 July 1945 and classes started 3 days later in the Notre Dame building (today the Students' House) on Anatomy, Biochemistry, Physiology, Physiopathology, Histology, Microbiology and Parasitology. There were 412 students enrolled in the first year and 76 students in the second year, transferred from other universities, compared with 4237 students in the academic year 2000-2001. The first class graduated in 1949, counting 70 graduate students. Since the school opened, 24,366 graduates, of whom 4,284 foreigners, have successfully completed their medical studies at the University of Timişoara. The first foreigner to study there did so in 1967-1968, when a single student from Yemen attended. At its inception, the building of the school was used for student lodging but eventually that purpose was served by the top floor of the university. Currently, the university has at its disposal 8 hostels, placed either in the close proximity of the university, or in the university campus. Meals were served at the Territorial Military Center and then at the canteen of the Polytechnic Institute until October 1945, when the university founded its own canteen, which today is able to provide meals for 900 people per day. Furthermore, in October 1945 the "Banatia" building, which had suffered considerable damage during World War II, was acquired, but this did not hinder the enthusiasm of the students of those days, and through considerable voluntary efforts contributed to a minimum organization of the building. Today, the university comprises a total of 8 buildings (the former "Banatia" being the main quarters of the university) in which different disciplines carry on their specific everyday activities. The clinical teaching started initially in 4 hospitals, but today, students are being trained in more than 25 university clinics, belonging to 12 hospitals. In time, the evolution of the University was also marked by changes in its title: The modest Faculty of Medicine developed and matured in spite of all difficulties it faced throughout time. Today, the Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy is a prestigious institution of higher education, with a past that honours and a promising future that will for sure bring valuable results both in preparing new generations of young physicians, pharmacists and dentists and also in the medical assistance offered to the community. SSMT or the Medical Students' Society from Timișoara 
