 Video game-related health problems can induce repetitive strain injuries, skin disorders or other health issues. Other problems include video game-provoked seizures in patients with epilepsy. In rare and extreme cases, deaths have resulted from excessive video game playing (see Deaths due to video game addiction and laziness). There may or may not be an accompanying video game addiction. Video games have also been linked in some studies to aggressive behaviour and violence or fearful behaviour by its players in the short term although other studies have not supported this link. Studies have mainly reported health problems in children, mainly boys. Several specific names have been given to video-game related health problems, for example PlayStation thumb, Nintendinitis and acute Wiiitis,X-boxitis; however, the literature does not seem to support these as truly separate disease entities.Video game consoles linked to medical problems include the PlayStation and the Nintendo Wii, although it is unknown whether certain types are more connected to these problems than others. Physical signs linked to excessive video game playing include black rings in the skin under the eyes and muscular stiffness in the shoulders, possibly caused by a tense posture or sleep deprivation. Existing literature on gaming is inconsistent, and studies occasionally produce contradictory results. Some studies show strong correlations between gaming and psychological issues like increased aggression in males, and increased depression in females. Whilst another study claims that girls who gamed were less likely to experience depression but were more likely to get into fights. In 2009, during a speech to American Medical Association, Obama named video games as a health concern, stating that video games are a key factor in unhealthy sedentary lifestyles. When questioned, children often admit to having physical complaints during video game playing, for example pain in the hands and wrists, back and neck. Children also complain about being asked questions like this.Ergonomic measures could improve postural problems associated with video game playing. A 2004 case report in The Lancet, authored by a 9-year-old boy, mentions the Playstation thumb, which features numbness and a blister caused by friction between the thumb and the controller from rapid game play.Using dermoscopy, dermatologists found point-like hemorrhages and onycholysis (letting go of the nail) in a patient who presented with hyperkeratosis. Nintendonitis has been used to describe tendon injuries (tendinosis) of the hands and wrists in Nintendo players. A 2010 case report in the New England Journal of Medicine reported a fracture of the base of the fifth metatarsal after using a Wii balanceboard; this was dubbed a Wii fracture. A further study involving musculoskeletal symptoms and computer use among Finnish adolescents affirmed the association between musculoskeletal symptoms and computer usage. The study claims that daily computer use of 2 hours or more increases the risk for pain at most anatomic sites. Consistently long sessions of video game play also leads to an increased likelihood of lower back pain, according to a study conducted in a population of school children. Children who played video games for more than 2 hours a day were more inclined to have lower back pain, however the same could not be said for those who watched television instead. Skin problems from excessive gaming may include stiffness, chaffed hands, warts on hands or on arms. Nintendinitis has been associated with skin ulceration. Palmar hidradenitis is a skin disorder induced by console gaming. Painful lesions on the palms and fingers are the main features. It differs from recurrent palmoplantar hidradenitis in that it affects only the hands. Those experiencing atopic eczema/dermatitis syndrome, may experience a heightened allergic response due to video game play. However video game play does not seem to have an effect on normal subject or those with allergic rhinitis. Video game playing may be associated with vision problems. Extensive viewing of the screen can cause eye strain, as the cornea, pupil, and iris are not intended for mass viewing sessions of electronic devices. Using video games for too long may also cause headaches, dizziness, and chances of vomiting from focusing on a screen for too long. However, certain studies have shown that video games can be used to improve various eye conditions. An investigation into the effect of action gaming on spatial distribution of attention was conducted and revealed that gamers exhibited an enhancement with attentional resources compared to non-gamers, not only in the periphery but also in central vision. Further studies in 2011, concluded that a combination of video game therapy alongside occlusion therapy, would greatly improve the recovery of visual acuity in those experiencing Amblyopia. Some studies claim that excessive video game playing may lead to several adverse psychological affects. One such study claimed that excessive interaction with violent video games may lead to an increase in aggressive behaviour and decreases pro-social behaviour. A different study involving a mixture of male and female undergraduate students supports the previous fact and also claims that the effect is larger for men than for women. On the other hand, studies have also revealed that participation in pro-social video games increases pro-social cognitions and helpful behaviours. Sessions of pro-social video games are associated with reduced hostility and increased positive state affect; Violent video games proved to have the opposite effects. Studies have concerning video game play and cerebral blood flow, concluded that after a session of violent video game play, the player would show a significant decrease in cerebral blood flow in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, temporal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and fusiform gyrus. The decreased cerebral blood flow thus shows reduced or abnormal prefrontal cortex functions after video game playing. Violent video games also contribute to stress levels. A recent study states that violent video game players had lower cardiac coherence levels and higher aggression levels compared to non-violent game players. The study claims that it is quite possible that violent games increase aggression by inducing stress, however more studies are required to fully confirm this fact. A study in 2009 showed greater depression amongst female video game players, and overall poorer health when compared to females who did not play video games. The same study concluded that "the only determinant common to female and male video-game players was a greater reliance on the internet for social support". Those who experience video game dependency are accompanied by increased levels of psychological and social stress. They tend to have lower academic achievements, increased truancy and reduced sleep time. Video game play has been constantly associated with obesity. Many studies have been conducted on the link between television & video games and increased BMI (Body Mass Index). Due to video games replacing physical activities, there appears to be a clear association between time spent playing video games and increased BMI in young children. One such study produced data that indicated that boys who spend less than 1.5 hours on the television and playing video games, were 75.4% less likely to be overweight than those who spend more than 1.5 hours. A study conducted in 2011 formalized the association of video game play and an increase in food intake in teens. A single session of video game play resulted in an increase in food intake, regardless of appetite. The recent trend of "active video games" revolving around the Wii and Xbox Kinect might be a way to help combat the aforementioned problem however this finding still needs confirmation from other studies. Furthermore a study conducted in Baylor College of Medicine revolving around children claims that there is no evidence which supports the belief that acquiring an active video game under naturalistic circumstance would result in a beneficial outcome toward children. The study produced no results showing an increased amount of physical activity within the children receiving the active video games. It has been estimated that children in the United States are spending 25 percent of their waking hours watching television and playing videogames. Statistically the children who watch the most hours of television or play video games have the highest incidence of obesity we can see. 
