 Virtual reality therapy (VRT), also known as virtual reality immersion therapy (VRIT), Simulation for Therapy(SFT), virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET), and as Computerized CBT (CCBT), is a method of psychotherapy that uses virtual reality technology to treat patients with anxiety disorders and phobias where it has proven very effective. New technology also allows for the treatment of addictions and other conditions including those caused by lesions.(Lamson, ext. ref. 2, pp108–111) Virtual Reality Therapy (VRT) uses specially programmed computers, visual immersion devices and artificially created environments to give the patient a simulated experience that can be used to diagnose and treat psychological conditions that cause patients difficulty. In many environmental phobias, reaction to the perceived hazards, such as heights, speaking in public, flying, close spaces, and the like are usually triggered by visual and auditory stimuli. In VR-based therapies, the virtual world is a means of providing artificial, controlled stimuli in the context of treatment, and with a therapist able to monitor the patient's reaction. Unlike traditional cognitive behavior therapy, VR-based treatment may involve adjusting the virtual environment, such as for example adding controlled intensity smells or adding and adjusting vibrations, and allow the clinician to determine the triggers and triggering levels for each patient's reaction. VR-based therapy systems may allow replaying virtual scenes, with or without adjustment, to habituate the patient to such environments. VR-Exposure, as compared to in-vivo exposure has the advantage of providing the patient a vivid experience, without the associated risks or costs. VRIT has great promise since it historically produces a "cure" about 90% of the time at about half the cost of traditional cognitive behavior therapy <authority>, and is especially promising as a treatment for PTSD where there are simply not enough psychologists and psychiatrists to treat all the veterans with anxiety disorders diagnosed as related to their military service. One of the earliest recorded explorations of VRIT was done by Dr. Ralph Lamson a USC graduate and now retired clinical psychologist then at Kaiser Permanente Psychiatry Group, San Rafael, CA in the early 1990s as a means to solve his own acrophobia or fear of heights. About the same time, Dr. Larry Hodges, then a computer scientist at Georgia Tech active in VR and Dr. Barbara Rothbaum, a psychologist at Emory University, began studying VRT in cooperation with Dr. Max North, who had reported anomalous behavior in flying carpet simulation VR studies and attributed such to phobic response of unknown nature. More recently, Dr. Skip Rizzo of USC's Institute for Creative Technologies, who had, with DOD funding, created a war simulation called Full Spectrum Warrior, with funding from ONR (Office of Naval Research ) created an adaptation of that game for the treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ("PTSD"). Virtual Iraq was subsequently developed under ONR funding and is supported by Virtually Better, Inc. VBI also supports applications of VR-based therapy for fear-of-flying, fear-of-heights, fear-of-public-speaking, and substance abuse. Virtual Iraq proved successful in normalization of over 70% of PTSD sufferers, and that has now become a standard accepted treatment by the Anxiety and Depression Association of America. However, the VA has continued to emphasize traditional PET (Prolonged exposure therapy)as the treatment of choice, and VR-based therapies have gained only limited adoption, despite active promotion by DOD. This is interesting in view of VRT having much lower cost and apparently higher success rates, and a $12MM ONR funded study is currently underway to definitively compare the efficacy of the two methods, PET and VRT . Military labs have subsequently set up dozens of VRIT labs and treatment centers for treating both PTSD and a variety of other medical conditions. The use of VRT has thus become a mainstream psychiatric treatment for anxiety disorders and is finding increasing use in the treatment of other cognitive disorders associated with various medical conditions such as addiction, depression and insomnia. Randomized, tightly controlled, acrophobia treatment trials at Kaiser Permanente provided >90% effectiveness, conducted in 1993-4. (Ext. Ref. 2, pg. 71) Of 40 patients treated, 38 showed marked reduction in phobic reaction to heights and self-reported reaching their goals. Research found that VRT allows patients to achieve victory over virtual height situations they could not confront in real life, and that gradually increasing the height and danger in a virtual environment produced increasing victories and greater self-confidence in the patient that they could actually confront the situation in real life. "Virtual therapy interventions empower people. The simulation technology of virtual reality lends itself to mastery oriented treatment...Rather than coping with threats, phobics manage progressively more threatening aspects in a computer generated environment...The range of applications can be extended by enhancing the realness and interactivity so that actions elicit reactions from the environments in which individuals immerse themselves"(Ext. Ref. 3, pg331-332)</noinclude> Another study examined the effectiveness of Virtual Reality Therapy in treating military combat personnel recently returning from the current conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. Rauch, Eftekhari and Ruzek conducted a study with a sample of 42 combat servicemen who were already diagnosed with chronic PTSD (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder). These combat servicemen were pre-screened using several different diagnostic self-reports including the PTSD military checklist, a screening tool used by the military in the determination of the intensity of the diagnosis of PTSD by measuring the presence of PTSD symptoms. Although 22 of the servicemen dropped out of the study, the results of the study concerning the 20 remaining servicemen still has merit. The servicemen were given the same diagnostic tests after the study which consisted of multiple sessions of virtual reality exposure and Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy. The servicemen showed much improvement in the diagnostic scores, signaling a decrease of symptoms of PTSD. Likewise, a three-month follow-up diagnostic screening was also administered after the initial sessions that were undergone by the servicemen. The results of this study showed that 15 of the 20 participants no longer met diagnostic criteria for PTSD and improved their PTSD military checklist score by 50% for the assessment following the study. Even though only 17 of the 20 participants participated in the 3 month follow-up screening, 13 of the 17 still did not meet the criteria for PTSD and maintained their 50% improvement in the PTSD military checklist score. These results show promising effects and help to validate Virtual Reality Therapy as an efficacious mode of therapy for the treatment of PTSD. (McLay, et al., 2012) Larry Hodges, formerly of Ga. Tech and now Clemson and Barbara Rothbaum of Emory Univ., both in the Atlanta, GA area, have done extensive work in VRIT, and also have several patents and founded Virtually Better, Inc. In the United States DOD continues funding of VRT research and is actively using VRT in treatment of PTSD. For an example of current treatment using VRT, there are many videos of actual sessions. There are VRT or Computerised CBT (CCBT)sessions, some immersive and some not, in which the user interacts with computer software (either on a PC, or sometimes via a voice-activated phone service), instead of face to face with a therapist. For people who are embarrassed by their phobias or feeling depressed and withdrawn, the prospect of having to speak to someone about their innermost problems can be unpleasant. In this respect, VIRT/CCBT either in a VR lab or online, is an option. With the huge number of PTSD sufferers and the shortage of available mental health professional, VRIT is expanding. New VR therapy sessions are even being done via the well known VR provider Second Life. It is becoming well known enough to even be a question on Jeopardy. The use of VRIT continues to expand due to this effectiveness. In February 2006 the UK's National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) recommended that VRIT be made available for use within the NHS across England and Wales, for patients presenting with mild/moderate depression, rather than immediately opting for antidepressant medication. Some areas have developed, or are trialing. One of the more prominent uses of VRIT is for treatment of PTSD, due to the increasing use of the program Virtual Iraq developed by A.A. "Skip"Rizzo of USC from the video game Full Spectrum Warrior. These days there are a number of providers offering VERT. Some offer interactive communication with therapists and live feedback has shown to improve the result of online VIRT/CCBT. At Auckland University in New Zealand, a team led by Dr. Sally Merry have been developing a computerised CBT fantasy 'serious' game to help tackle depression amongst adolescences. The game is currently undergoing testing and the results are thought to be released in 2011. The game has a number of features to help combat depression, where the user takes on a role of a character who travels through a fantasy world, combating 'literal' negative thoughts and learning techniques to manage their depression. Virtual reality therapy has two promising potential benefits for treatment of hemispatial neglect with lesion (Hemispatial_neglect) patients including: improvement of diagnostic techniques and as a supplement to rehabilitation techniques. Current diagnostic techniques usually involve pen and paper tests like the line bisection test. Though these tests have provided relatively accurate diagnostic results, advances in Virtual Reality Therapy (VRT) have proven these tests to not be completely thorough. Dvorkin et al used a camera system that immersed the patient into a virtual reality world and required the patient to grasp or move object in the world, through tracking of arm and hand movements. These techniques revealed that pen and paper tests provide relatively accurate qualitative diagnoses of hemispatial neglect patients, but VRT provided accurate mapping into a 3-dimensional space, revealing areas of space that were thought to be neglected but which patients had at least some awareness. Patients were also retested 10 months from initial measurements, during which each went through regular rehabilitation therapy, and most showed measurably less neglect on virtual reality testing whereas no measureable improvements were shown in the line bisection test. ii. Virtual Reality Therapy has also proven to be effective in rehabilitation of lesion patients suffering from neglect. A study was conducted with 24 individuals suffering from hemispatial neglect. A control group of 12 individuals underwent conventional rehabilitation therapy including visual scanning training, while the virtual reality group (VR) were immersed in 3 virtual worlds, each with a specific task. The programs consisted of 1. “Bird and Ball” in which a patient touches a flying ball with his or her hand and turns it into a bird 2. “Coconut,” in which a patient catches a coconut falling from a tree while moving around3. “Container” in which a patient moves a box carried in a container to the opposite side.Each of the patients of VR went through 3 weeks, 5 days a week, of 30 minute intervals emerged in these programs. The controls went through the equivalent time in traditional rehabilitation therapies. Each patient took the star cancellation test, line bisection test, and Catherine Bergego Scale (CBS) 24 hours before and after the three-week treatment to assess the severity of unilateral spatial neglect. The VR group showed a higher increase in the star cancellation test and CBS scores after treatment than the control group (p<0.05), but both groups did not show any difference in the line bisection test and K-MBI before and after treatment. These results suggest that virtual reality programs can be more effective then conventional rehabilitation and thus should be further researched. Although VRET (Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy) looks promising there are a few ethical concerns that should be raised concerning the use and development of using virtual reality simulation for helping clients/patients with mental health issues, such as PTSD. One of these concerns is the potential side effects an after effects of virtual reality exposure. Some of these side effects and after effects could include cyber sickness, a type of motion sickness caused by the virtual reality experience, perceptual-motor disturbances, flashbacks, and generally lowered arousal. (Rizzo, Schultheis, & Rothbaum, 2003) If severe and widespread enough, these effects should be mitigated via various methods by those therapists using virtual reality. Another ethical issue of some concern is how virtual reality is use by clinicians in that clinicians should be certified to use virtual reality for their clients/patients. Due to the relative newness of virtual reality exposure, there may not be many clinicians who have experience with the nuances of virtual reality exposure and the therapy that virtual reality exposure is meant to be used for. According to Rizzo et. Al (2003), virtual reality technology should only be used as a tool for qualified clinicians instead of being used to further one’s practice or garner an attraction for new clients/patients. Another ethical issue is the issue of who is developing the virtual reality and thus benefiting from its sale? In terms of the development of virtual reality technology, some firms double as out-patient clinics. For example, The Virtually Better ™ virtual reality exposure therapy system originates from an outpatient clinic that uses the technology as well as other like therapies such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and Exposure Therapy. (Virtually Better Inc., 2013) Another non-scientific agenda being explored with VRET is that of the concern of the overall mental health of military personnel by the United States Department of Defense. In 2011, the Department of Defense gave researchers at Emory University School of Medicine, New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center and University of Southern California an 11 million dollar grant to conduct research on the two different types of exposure therapy, traditional and virtual reality, with a drug in order to treat PTSD. Although, as with all evolving technologies and techniques in psychology, there are many other ethical concerns that could be listed these are just some of note. 1. North, Max, et al., Virtual Reality Therapy - An Innovative Paradigm, 221 pages, (IPI Press 1996) 2. Lamson, Ralph J, Virtual Therapy, Virtual Therapy - Prevention and Treatment of Psychiatric Conditions by Immersion in Virtual Reality Environments, 172 pages, (Polytechnic International Press(Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal)1997) 3. Bandura, A. "Self-efficacy: the exercise of control" (see article). New York: W.H.Freeman & Co., 1997. Pages 331-332. 4. Dvorkin A.Y., Rymer W.Z., Harvey R.L., Bogey R.A. & Patton J.L. Assessment and monitoring of recovery of spatial neglect within a virtual environment, Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Rehabilitation 2008. p. 88-92, Vancouver, Canada, Aug. 2008. 5. Kim, Yong Mi, et al. "The Effect of Virtual Reality Training on Unilateral Spatial Neglect in Stroke Patients." Annals of Rehabilitation Medicine 35.3 (2011): 309-315. 6. McLay, R. N., Graap, K., Spira, J., Perlman, K., Johnston, S., Rotbaum, B., . . . Rizzo, A. (2012). Development and Testing of Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Active Duty Service Members Who Served in Iraq and Afghanistan. Military Medicine, 635-642. 7. Rizzo, A., Schultheis, M., & Rothbaum, B. (2003). Ethical Issues for the Use of Virtual Reality in the Psychological Sciences. Ethical Issues in Clincal Neuropsychology, 243-280. 8. Virtually Better Inc. (2013). Virtually Better Homepage. Retrieved from Virtually Better: http://www.virtuallybetter.com/ 9. Baker, K. (2011, December 13). Department of Defense Grant Boosts PTSD Research. Retrieved from Emory University: http://shared.web.emory.edu/emory/news/releases/2011/12/department-of-defense-grant-boosts-ptsd-research.html#.UV5Le1cb3a4 
