 Wandering womb was the belief that a displaced uterus was the cause of many medical pathologies in women. The belief originates in the medical texts of ancient Greece, although the belief persisted in European academic medicine for centuries. The belief in the "wandering womb" was part of the teachings of Hippocrates. A description of the theory of a "wandering womb" is from Aretaeus, a physician from Cappadocia, who was a contemporary of Galen in the 2nd century. He wrote that the uterus could move out of place, and float within the body. The philosopher Plato also described the phenomenon: The belief that the uterus could move freely, similar to an "animal within an animal", may have been part of ancient cultural beliefs in Greece, but the earliest known written accounts of it are in the teachings of Hippocrates. The movement of the uterus was believed to cause pressure on nerves, arteries, and other organs, which in turn created symptoms of illness. This was believed to be the cause of a large number of pathologies, such as "choking, sleepiness, loss of speech, vertigo, knee problems, headaches, problems with the veins in the nose, heartburn, pulse irregularities, and death". Soranus of Ephesus (circa 98 to 138 CE) was a rare exception among gynecology physicians in opposing the theory of the "wandering womb". Soranus wrote, "the uterus does not issue forth like a wild animal from the lair, delighted by fragrant odors and fleeing bad odors, rather it is drawn together because of stricture caused by inflammation". Galen also insisted that the uterus was stationary. Yet, despite the fact that Soranus was an influential writer on gynecology, and that Galen was the Greco-Roman medical writer with the greatest overall influence on Medieval and Renaissance medicine in Europe, the belief in the "wandering womb" continued for centuries. The concept of hysteria caused by "wandering womb" continued to be taught from one generation of medical researchers to the next in Europe up until the early modern era. Medical researchers developed a better understanding of anatomy after the invention of microscopes in the 17th century and cellular research in the 19th century. However, the Hippocratic belief that women had a more fragile constitution vulnerable to irrationality and hysteria persisted. Sigmund Freud's theory of the free-floating subconscious, the "mind within the mind", was similar to the ancient belief in the "animal within the animal". Both "wandering womb" and "hysteria" are obsolete medical theories that have been discredited today. 
