 Wannan Medical College, also sometimes be called as Wannan Medical Academy,(), is a national medical college located in Wuhu, Anhui Province, of the People's Republic of China. The school is directly supervised under the jurisdiction of Education Bureau of Anhui Province. The school was founded in 1958, known as Wuhu Medical Vocational School. In 1970, it merged into Anhui Medical College and functioned as its branch in South Anhui. In 1974, with the approval of Ministry of Education, the school became independent institution and renamed Wannan Medical College (WNMC). In 1981, the college was among the first list of colleges and universities with authority to award bachelor’s and master’s degrees vested by the Academic Degree Evaluation Committee under the State Council. In 1998, it successfully passed the evaluations on the undergraduate programs，which is organized by the Ministry of Education. The college now offers 18 undergraduate specialties covering clinical medicine, nursing，oral medicine and forensic medicine, and 9 vocational specialties. In postgraduate program, there are 15 master’s degree authorized units, covering nearly all the branches of the basic and clinical medicine. There are also 10 research centers in the college. The medical college consists of 3 campuses, all in Wuhu city.The old campus (including the adult college and one nurses’ school) enjoys fine environment with Iron Hill on the south and Zheshan Park on the east. The second campus (the biggest one) is located in Weiliu Road, University Park of Wuhu city.The third campus, which is still under construction, is located in the higher education garden too. There no data about the current students. But it is said at least more than 12000 students are now studying in this college. The majority is full-time undergraduate students as well as postgraduate students. Employment rate of the graduates of this school ranks higher in the list of the provincial colleges and universities.In 2006, 95.22% of the graduations were employed successfully. In 2005, the data was said to be 97.21%. There are varied departments including Department of Nursing, Department of Basic Medicine department, Department of Anesthesia, Department of Stomatology, Department of Forensic medicine, Department of Pharmacy, Department of Psychology, Department of Iconography and Department of Humanities and Administration. Among these departments, Department of Humanities and Administration is the most integrative one because it contains 5 medical-related fields: Medical Law, Medical Insurance, Information Management and System Program, Health Service Management, Public Utilities. The college is a medicine-focused and integrative medical institution of higher learning, it is also a fully accommodated medical institution. In 2008, it offers 18 undergraduate specialties including Clinical Medicine, Nursing, Forensic Medicine, Medical Law, Applied Psychology, Anesthesiology, Medical Imageology, Stomatology, Information Management and System Program, Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Engineering, Public Utilities... In postgraduate specialties, there are 16 master’s degree authorized units, 85 areas covering almost all branches of basic and clinical medicine and interdisciplinary subject. According to the official data in 2006, there are also 10 experimental centers and 93 research laboratories belong to the college. Some programs like Medical Law, Information Management and System Program and Public Utilities are newly developed disciplines that represent the new-born multidisciplinary programs concerning medical in China. The college also publishes 2 academic journals both domestic and abroad: The Journal of Wannan Medical College and The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics of China. In accordance with the data of 2007, there were over 2123 full-time faculty, including about 125 professors, 310 associate professors, 560 adjunct professors and 49 experts who enjoy special subsidies of the Chinese government. It is located at Yiji mountain of Wuhu City, Anhui Province, which is next to the Yijishan scenic zone near the Yangtze River. The hospital has a history of more than 120 years since it was founded by American Methodist Episcopal Church in 1888. It’s the place where many famous medical experts in China once worked, including Wu Shaoqing, Shen Kefei, and Chen Cuizhen. Professor Li Jiren from the Traditional Chinese Medicine department has been awarded the ’National Master of Traditional Chinese Medical Science’ in the first batch of honor name list in China. Yijishan Hospital is one of the 3A-level Hospitals firstly awarded by Ministry of Health. It is the biggest provincial medically and technically instructional center of health care, teaching, scientific research, prevention, rehabilitation, and emergency medicine in the south of Anhui province. Covering a land of 18 hectares with the construction area of 170,000 square meters, Yijishan Hospital has a total of 2100 ward beds, 40 clinical sections, 14 technical sections, and 21 teaching and research divisions. Of 2100 hospital employees, there are over 400 chief and deputy chief physicians, pharmacists and nurses (professor’s and associate professor’s level), and more than 300 staffs with doctoral degree (PhD or MD) or master’s degree. Yijishan Hospital owns many kinds of up-to-date equipment, such as 64-row spinner CT, Phillips ECR with two detectors, Phillips two-boar DR, Kodak DR and CR, three Siemens DSAs, dynamic digital gastrointestinal angiography machine, mammography breast machine, color doppler ultrasound imaging equipment including Phillips IE33, Siemens 512, GEE8 and so on, and is also equipped with high-grade, precision and advanced inspection machines: ultrasound endoscope, capsule endoscopy, various kinds of soft and hard cavity scope, high frequency surgical unit, brain stereotactic instrument, microendoscopic discectomy, arthroscopy, microscope and 7600 Hitachi automatic biochemical analyzer, USA Beckman automatic blood instrument, Japan Hitachi automatic blood instrument, France STAGO automatic blood clots instrument, Beckman Flow Cytometer, Roche fluorescent PCR, and the tumor-treating equipment including Elekta high-energy accelerator with the strong function, after loader, microwave heat treatment machines and so on. 
