 Medical emergencies in areas of wilderness present particular challenges that can requires specialised responses. These are incidents which produce an elevated number of injuries, such as blizzards, earthquake, avalanche, landslide, floods and forest fire. Triage is a concern as well as location of victims who may be in dense foliage, rocky and remote locations or covered in mud, snow and debris. Helicopters are used to access remote locations during natural disasters. In other instances, mass casualties have resulted when parties of climbers or explorers have suffered adverse consequences of human error, with or without complications from inclement weather. Transporting an injured person out of the wilderness on a stretcher can be a difficult exercise requiring considerable manpower. It is advised that at least one person stay with an injured party and that no one attempt to seek help by travelling alone over inhospitable terrain. Wilderness First Aid (WFA) is the specific discipline of First aid which relates to care in remote areas, where emergency medical services will be difficult to obtain or will take a long time to arrive. Locating the victim precedes assessment and intervention and in the case of wilderness response is often a difficult matter. Specialists in white water rescue, mountain rescue, mine disaster response and other specialties are often employed. In some cases, emergency extrication procedures at incidents such as automobile accidents are required before assessment is possible. Once the location of the victim has been determined, a trained responder has been dispatched and successfully reached the victim can the ordinary first aid process begin.Assessment is then enabled and it follows carefully specified protocols which have been refined through a long process of evaluation. Wilderness First Aid is a relatively new field compared to regular or 'urban' first aid. For this reason, there are a number of boards and societies which have been formed in recent years to attempt to establish normalized standards for wilderness first aid certification and wilderness medicine in general. Currently, there are no "National Standards" for wilderness medicine, however one of the most popularly followed curricula is the "National Practice Guidelines for Wilderness Emergency Care" published by the Wilderness Medical Society. The American Red Cross Wilderness & Remote First Aid (r.2010) certification is valid for 2 years. In Canada the first WFA course were taught in the mid 1980's and the first organization (now defunct 1986 to 1998) to adopt standards was the Wilderness First Aid and Safety Association of BC. The Boy Scouts of America is now also requiring a WFA certification for anybody who goes on a High-Adventure trek. "Philmont requires that a least one person, preferably two, (either an advisor or a youth participant) in each crew be currently certified in Wilderness First Aid or the equivalent* and CPR from the American Heart Association, the American Red Cross, Emergency Care and Safety Institute (ECSI), or American Safety & Health Institute (ASHI). The preferred course is the American Red Cross, Wilderness First Aid, which is a sixteen-hour course designed to help in situations when help is not readily available. Several hours may be required for high adventure staff to reach a remote backcountry location after a message is delivered to the nearest staffed camp. First aid and CPR training will result in proper and prompt attention being given to injuries and/or illnesses. You must present current certification cards upon check in to verify this requirement.” A Wilderness First Responder certification is both a higher certification than a Wilderness First Aid certification, and may also be used to upgrade an Emergency Medical Technician to a Wilderness Emergency Medical Technician. Outdoor Emergency Care is a Ski Patroller certification, but it doesn't fully meet the requirements for a WFR certification. In emergency medicine, some advocates assert that there is a golden hour which refers to a time period lasting from a few minutes to several hours following traumatic injury being sustained by a casualty, during which there is the highest likelihood that prompt medical treatment will prevent death. While most medical professionals agree that delays in definitive care are undesirable, recent peer reviewed literature casts doubt on the validity of the 'golden hour' as it appears to lack a scientific basis. Dr. Bryan Bledsoe, an outspoken critic of the golden hour and other EMS "myths" like critical incident stress management, has indicated that the peer reviewed medical literature does not demonstrate any "magical time" for saving critical patients. A number of fellowships are available for emergency medicine graduates including prehospital medicine (emergency medical services), hospice and palliative care, research, undersea and hyperbaric medicine, sports medicine, ultrasound, pediatric emergency medicine, disaster medicine, wilderness medicine, toxicology, and Critical Care Medicine. Butler FK Jr. The eye in the wilderness. In: Auerbach PS, ed. Wilderness Medicine . 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Mosby Elsevier;2007:chap 25. Mitchell JD. Ocular emergencies. In: Tintinalli JE, Kelen ...www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000054.htm - wilderness medicine wikispace 
