 William Henry Corfield (14 December 1843 – 26 August 1903) was an English hygienist. Appointed Professor of Hygiene and Public Health at University College London in 1869., Corfield revolutionised hygiene and household sanitation in Victorian England. William Henry Corfield went to Cheltenham Grammar School and pursued an amazing academic career, going to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 12 October 1861 at the age of 17. He was chosen to accompany Professor Daubeny on an examination of the volcanoes in Montbrison in France and then took up the Sheppard Medical Fellowship at Pembroke College, Oxford. He also won the Radcliffe Travelling Fellowship which enabled him to visit academic institutions in Europe where he became interested in hygiene and sanitary sciences. In Paris he studied under Behier, See, Hardy and other eminent men of the times, as well as attending Bourchardat's lectures on hygiene. He then went to Lyon to work on clinical medicine, surgery and also made a special study of the remains of the aqueducts of ancient Lugdunum (Lyon), also visiting medical schools in Italy and Sicily. In London he studied at University College Hospital and in 1868 was appointed examiner for Honours Science at Oxford University. The following year he was appointed Professor of Hygiene and Public Health at University College, London, a position he held until his death. He established the first hygiene laboratory in London in 1875 and a museum of practical hygiene in London in 1876. In 1869 he was elected onto a committee appointed by the British Association for the Advancement of Science to report on the treatment and utilisation of sewage. For six years he was reporter to the committee which was to greatly influence subsequent progress in sanitary science. At the request of the committee Corfield prepared "A Digest of Facts relating to the Treatment and Utilisation of Sewage" which was published in 1870. This embodied a vast amount of original research and was in no sense a committee report. In November 1871, Edward, Prince of Wales, who was later to become King Edward VII, contracted typhoid fever while he was staying at Londesborough Lodge, Scarborough; Lord Chesterfield, a fellow guest dying of the disease. This brought to public attention the subject of house sanitation and Corfield, at the request of Lord Londesborough, examined the house describing it in a letter to the Times newspaper, 22 January 1872. Later Corfield said, in a discussion on preventing enteric fever at the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society: "On going through my original notes I have been forced to the conclusion that it was not a case in which the disease was conveyed by sewer air, because the persons who were most in the house did not get it." As a result of his success in diagnosing the causes of the illnesses Corfield enjoyed a large consulting practice for private and public buildings. At his death Corfield was President of the Epidemiological Society, Past President of the Society of Medical Officers of Health, and Vice-President of the Sanitary Institute. He was Honorary Corresponding Member of the Royal Academy of Medicine in Belgium, the Imperial Society of Medicine in Constantinople, and the Italian Royal Society of Hygiene. He was an Honorary Member of the French Society of Hygiene and the Hungarian Society of Public Health and a Fellow of the Medical Society of Sweden. He was a collector of rare books and a keen fisherman. He died in Sweden whilst on a fishing holiday although he had been suffering for some time from dyspepsia and diarrhoea. {{Persondata | NAME = Corfield, William Henry | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 14 December 1843 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH = 26 August 1903 | PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
