 William Charles Dement (born 1928) is a pioneering US sleep researcher and founder of the Sleep Research Center, the world's first sleep laboratory, at Stanford University. He is a leading authority on sleep, sleep deprivation and the diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders such as sleep apnea and narcolepsy. For this pioneering work in a previously uncharted field, he is sometimes referred to as the father of sleep medicine. In the 1950s as a medical student at the University of Chicago, he was the first to intensively study the connection between rapid eye movement and dreaming. His fellow student Eugene Aserinsky had mentioned to him that "Dr. Kleitman and I think these eye movements might be related to dreaming". Aserinsky, along with his and Dement's adviser Nathaniel Kleitman, had previously noticed the connection but hadn't considered it very interesting. Dement had an interest in psychiatry, which in those days considered dreams to be important, so he was excited by the discovery and was eager to pursue it. He began his work in sleep deprivation at Mount Sinai Hospital in the late 1950s – the early 1960s. He was among the first researchers to study sleeping subjects with the electroencephalogram (EEG), and he wrote "I believe that the study of sleep became a true scientific field in 1953, when I finally was able to make all-night, continuous recordings of brain and eye activity during sleep." Studying these recordings, he discovered and named the five stages of sleep. In collaboration with Dr. Christian Guilleminault, Dement proposed the measure that is still used for the clinical definition of sleep apnea and the rating of its severity, the Apnea Hypopnea Index (AHI). Dement, Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University School of Medicine, taught the large and popular "Sleep and Dreams" course at Stanford from 1971 until 2003. Due to popular demand he decided to teach the class again in 2006 and has continued to teach till this very day. Dement has been spending a great deal of time focusing on spreading information about the danger of driving when drowsy and obstructive sleep apnea. In 1975 he launched the American Sleep Disorders Association, now known as the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, and served as president for its first twelve years. In that same year he and Mary Carskadon invented the Multiple Sleep Latency Test used to measure sleepiness, a test of how quickly people fall asleep, sleep onset latency, during several daytime opportunities. He was also chairman of the National Commission on Sleep Disorders Research, whose final report led directly to the creation of a new agency within the National Institutes of Health, the National Center on Sleep Disorders Research. Dement is the author of numerous books, including The Promise of Sleep and The Sleepwatchers, and has written the first undergraduate textbook in the field.. The Promise of Sleep along with a cameo appearance of himself was featured in the 2012 independent comedy film Sleepwalk with Me. At the start of his academic career, he was a jazz musician and played bass. While at the University of Washington he jammed with Quincy Jones, a time during which he also befriended Ray Charles. During the late 80s, while at Stanford, he was known to have played, on at least one occasion, with artist-in-residence, Stan Getz. He lives with his family in northern California. {{Persondata | NAME = Dement, William C. | ALTERNATIVE NAMES =| SHORT DESCRIPTION =| DATE OF BIRTH = 1928 | PLACE OF BIRTH =| DATE OF DEATH =| PLACE OF DEATH =}} 
