 Norway experienced the initial phases of a new influenza pandemic in the spring of 2009. Initial cases were tourists returning from other affected areas. In the summer of 2009, local person-to-person infection within Norway established itself. Soon thereafter, the number of patients tested for swine flu exceeded capacity, and authorities recommended that only patients with severe symptoms be tested. The first death from swine flu was reported in early September. As of October 2009, Norway is notable among the Scandinavian countries for a high number of swine flu deaths - 29 deaths as of January 4, 2010. All 19 counties of Norway now have confirmed cases, and 5 of these have had deaths from swine flu. Only Svalbard has no cases of swine flu. Norwegian authorities had a pre-existing pandemic flu vaccine agreement with the pharmaceutical industry, and when the World Health Organization declared a pandemic, about 10 million doses of new flu vaccine were ordered. The first widespread vaccination started in Bergen on October 22, with several hundred queuing up. The new flu has been given widespread media coverage. The Norwegian government publishes a regular tally of laboratory-confirmed cases of swine flu, but makes clear that this is a gross underestimation of the true number of swine flu cases. A filtered and purified Influenza A vaccine for humans is being developed and many countries have recommended it be stockpiles so if an Avian influenza pandemic starts jumping to humans,the vaccine can quickly be administered to avoid lost of life. Avian influenza is sometimes called avian flu, and commonly bird flu. On April 25, 2009, the Norwegian Institute for Public Health increased their alertness as a result of reports of a severe influenza in Mexico. Three days later, it was considered "highly likely" that the new flu would reach Norway within the next few weeks and the first confirmed cases came on May 9, 2009. The initial suspected and confirmed cases were tourists returning from affected areas. During the summer of 2009, local spread was established. On May 9, 2009 the first confirmed cases were reported in two students from Oslo and Telemark returning from abroad. As of early July 2009, there were 42 confirmed cases of swine flu, 39 of which were infected while abroad. In late July 2009, a local outbreak was reported in a summer camp in Western Norway. The number of patients tested for suspected new flu increased beyond capacity, and by late July 2009 Norwegian authorities were recommending that only patients with severe symptoms were to be tested, as well as a few sentinel cases to confirm local spread. The Norwegian government has operated an influenza surveillance system for many years. In this system, 201 selected general practices throughout the country report weekly on what percentage of their doctor contacts that are given the diagnosis of influenza-like illness. These practices cover about 15% of the population. The results of the influenza surveillance during the 2009 flu pandemic in Norway are shown in the figure below. The share of doctor contacts that ended in a diagnosis of influenza-like illness shot up to close to 10% in week 44. The last time this percentage was as high was in the 1999-2000 flu season. On the basis of the last reported data as of November 4, 2009, the Norwegian Public Health Institute conclude that "the pandemic influenza virus is spreading epidemically in large parts of the country." The probable scenario is that 30% of the population fall ill, after half a year; 15% of the population will be in ill and in bed. About half of the infected population is will become sick. This means that about 700,000 Norwegians will fall ill and that in this period an extra 700 – 3,000 deaths relative to the regular influenza season is expected. The worst case scenario would be that 50% of the population will fall ill within a half a year, 25% of the population will be ill and in bed. This means that 1.2 million Norwegians will fall ill in this period and that in this period an extra 5,000 – 13,000 deaths relative to the regular influenza season is expected. If 30% of the population becomes infected and 15% of the population falls ill in half a year, about 4-5% of these will be ill and in bed as the epidemic is on its worst. If 50% of the population becomes infected; and 25% falls ill and becomes ill and in bed, about 8% of these will be sick and in bed when the pandemic is at its worst. These numbers are estimated as an average nationwide, and that there might be great geographical differences, and in some areas a much greater amount of people might be ill at the same time. Norway has a stockpile of 1.4 million doses of Tamiflu, and has ordered 200,000 doses of Relenza. The Norwegian Institute of Public Health (FHI) announced that it would be only a matter of time before the virus was being transmitted within Norway and that cases of travelers falling ill would be expected the next weeks. The main goals would be to reduce the spread of the virus in Norway as soon as it started. Even so, closure of public institutions such as schools and kindergartens was to be avoided as long as possible. As of May 15, the Norwegian government lifted the advice not to travel to Mexico. Even so, people with increased risk of complications with the influenza are still advised to consider the need to travel. In early May Norway pre-ordered 4.7 million doses of the not-yet-developed Swine Influenza vaccine; the price was estimated to be $47.5 million. In that connection Health Care Minister Bjarne Håkon Hanssen said: The contract we are entering into will make it possible to secure vaccine for the population before a pandemic is declared. For myself and for the government it is important to follow up on the advice from the Pandemic Committee.... This is also in line with professional advice from the Health institutions. ) As of the fall of 2009, Norway will be supplied with 9,4 million dosages of the pandemic vaccine (GlaxoSmithKline). This means that every Norwegian can be given up to two dosages of the vaccine. The vaccine was intended to be ready for use, after clinical trials, in November/December. Because swine influenza still was considered to be a mild disease, the pandemic vaccine would not be taken into use before approval by the European Medicines Agency (EMEA). Norway will have enough vaccine for everyone by fall 2009, however it might still be necessary to give early vaccinations to certain people, depending on H1N1/09 pandemic development in the winter season in the southern hemisphere. The main targets for early vaccinations are health personnel and people with increased risk of complications, with the Health Care Ministry giving recommendations about which groups should be prioritized. Norwegian Institute of Public Health (FHI) updates their homepage with information about the swine flu outbreak in Norway every day at 10:00 (UTC). FHI believe that the northern hemisphere will not be greatly affected by the virus, with the exception of a few outbreaks in enclosed places (schools and other institutions, cruise ships), followed by a bigger epidemic in the fall or winter. Still the a lower probability that the first wave will strike Norway as early as this summer, just like the United States are experiencing right now. It is not yet certain how many Norwegians will fall ill even though a few estimates have been made. On May 9, two Norwegian students from Oslo and Telemark, were confirmed to be infected with swine flu after they came home from studies in Mexico. None of them became seriously ill and they are recovering quickly. A member of one of their families is suspected of being infected as well. One of them (the 20 year-old man from Oslo) have been confirmed completely recovered. These are the first two cases of swine influenza in Norway. On May 19, a Norwegian woman from Oslo was confirmed infected with the swine flu after coming home from USA. This is the third confirmed case of swine influenza in Norway. On May 20, a Norwegian man from Vest-Agder was confirmed with the swine influenza after returning from a trip to the United States. The man followed advice from his doctor and has completely recovered. This is the fourth confirmed case of swine influenza in Norway. On May 27, a Norwegian man was confirmed with the swine influenza in Düsseldorf, Germany. The man was put in isolation where he will stay for ten days. The reason this man suspected was because of he showed obvious symptoms of influenza on the flight from USA to Germany, when he exited the plane he was met by four doctors. This means the trip home to Norway will be delayed, and that he will have to spend at least ten days in isolation. This case is however not reported as a Norwegian case of swine influenza, but a German one. On May 28, three Norwegians from Østfold that recently came home from a trip abroad have fallen ill, and are suspected to be infected with the swine influenza. The results are expected over the weekend. They are currently isolated at home they not so ill that they require hospitalization. Neither of them so ill that their lives are at risk. On May 29, a Norwegian woman from Oslo was confirmed with the swine influenza after returning from a trip to the United States. Making her the fifth confirmed case in Norway. On May 30, two Norwegians were confirmed with the swine influenza, one of them was a woman from Rogaland, returning from Mexico, where she has been infected, the other one was a woman from Oslo, returning from the United States. Both of the women is recovering and will be followed up by local health officials. These are the sixth and seventh confirmed swine influenza cases in Norway. On June 3, a Norwegian woman coming home from the United States was confirmed with the swine influenza. The infected woman is recovering well. This is the eighth confirmed case of swine influenza. On June 4, a Norwegian woman from Vest-Agder who recently had been to the United States was confirmed with the swine influenza. The infected woman is recovering well. This is the ninth confirmed case of swine influenza. On June 9, two Norwegian men from Vest-Agder and Oslo who recently had been to the United States were confirmed with the swine influenza. These are the tenth and eleventh cases of swine influenza in Norway. On June 10, a Norwegian man from Vest-Agder was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had not been infected abroad, he also had been living with a person who had been infected abroad. This is the first domestic infected and is the twelfth case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 11, a Norwegian man from Oslo was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had not recently been traveling abroad. This is the second domestic infection and the thirteenth case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 12, a Norwegian man from Buskerud was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had not been traveling abroad, but had been working together with an infected person. This is the third domestic infection, and fourteenth case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 13, a Norwegian woman from Rogaland was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been to the United States, and was infected there. This is the fifteenth case of swine influenza in Norway On June 15, a Norwegian man from Sør Trøndelag was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been on a trip to the United States. This is the sixteenth case of swine influenza in Norway, and first case of swine influenza in Sør Trøndelag On June 17, a Norwegian man from Akershus was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to the United States. This is the seventeenth case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 18, a Norwegian man from Rogaland and two women from Akershus were confirmed with the swine influenza, they had all recently been traveling to the United States. And are the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 23, a Norwegian woman from Oslo and a Norwegian woman from Østfold were confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to the United states. This is the twenty-first and twenty-second case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 24, A Norwegian woman from Oslo was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to England. This is the twenty-third case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 25, A Norwegian man from Oslo was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to Argentina. This is the 24th case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 26, A Norwegian woman from Sogn og Fjorande was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to Greece. This is the 25th case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 29, A Norwegian woman from Hordaland was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to the United States. This is the 26th case of swine influenza in Norway. On June 30, Four Norwegian women (One from Oslo, One from Østfold and two from Sør-Trøndelag two Norwegian men (One from Oslo and one from Sør-Trøndelag), and a Norwegian boy from Østfold was confirmed with the swine influenza, all of the persons had been traveling abroad, five of them had recently been traveling to the United States, and the other two had recently been traveling to Argentina. These are the 27th, 28th, 29th,30th, 31st 32nd and 33rd case of swine influenza in Norway. On July 1, Seven Norwegians were confirmed with the swine influenza, these Norwegians were passengers on a cruise ship that that passed through the dock of Oslo, the ship did not transfer off the boat, and did not infect any persons on on land. These cases are not counted as Norwegian cases, and will therefore not be included in the Norwegian total. On July 2, a Norwegian woman from Bergen was confirmed with the swine influenza, this person had recently been traveling to the United States. This is the twenty-fourth case of swine influenza in Norway. On September 3, the first confirmed death caused by swine flu in Norway was reported. On September 10, 3rd death was reported. On October 19, the seventh death was confirmed in a previously healthy male in his 50s in Bergen. On October 20, an alarming increase in absence caused by flu was reported at primary schools in Oslo and Bergen. In one school, over half the students in 1st-6th grade were absent because of flu. On October 20, the eight death from the flu was confirmed in a woman in her twenties, in Akerhus county. On October 22, the city of Bergen started widespread vaccination and a long queue of person was reported. On October 22, the 9th death from the flu was confirmed in a woman in her fifties, in Akershus county. On October 23, the 10th death from the flu was confirmed in a two-year-old child in Vest-Agder county. On October 26, the 11th death from the flu was confirmed in a nine-year-old child in Oslo. On October 28, the 12th and 13 deaths from the flu were reported. On October 30, the 14th death from flu was confirmed. A woman in her forties from Ringsaker died at the hospital in Hamar. On November 2, the 15th death from flu was announced. A woman less than 20 years of age from Hedmark county died November 1 at Rikshospitalet. 
