 Acadian Ambulance is an ambulance service that covers most of the state of Louisiana. In 1995 it was recognized as the largest privately owned ambulance service in the United States. Today the company responds to emergency and non-emergency calls in Louisiana, Southeast Texas, Central Texas, North Texas and parts of Mississippi. Headquartered in Lafayette, Louisiana, Acadian Ambulance maintains a fleet of more than 400 ground ambulances, as well as eight medical transport helicopters and five fixed-wing aircraft that provide aerial transport to medical facilities. Acadian began operations at 12:01 AM September 1, 1971 when funeral homes stopped providing ambulance service because of new, financially burdensome federal guidelines. In addition to emergency medical services, Acadian offers an aircraft charter service, a personal medical alarm service, fire and burglar alarm service, industrial medical personnel, fire and safety technicians, and medical and industrial training, as well as billing software. Acadian Ambulance played a role, with many other ambulance services throughout the country, in responding to various healthcare emergencies caused by Hurricane Katrina in 2005. In the summer of 2006, Acadian expanded into southeast Texas and began providing emergency medical services in Orange County, Texas. In October 2006, Acadian acquired the assets of MetroCare EMS and began providing non-emergency transports in Travis County, Texas. Acadian Ambulance Service also provides ALS Ambulance Service to Jackson County, Mississippi. In October 2007, Acadian took over the service area from MetroCare in Travis and Jefferson county, in the Austin area. In April 2009, Acadian won the contract to cover unincorporated parts of Bexar County and San Antonio. In May 2010, Acadian acquired Stat Care EMS in Southeast Texas, adding service areas in Jasper, Newton and Sabine counties. As part of the expansion, the company established a communications center in Beaumont and now dispatches all Southeast Texas calls from that site. Acadian also has contracted with 10 cities bordering San Antonio and in Bexar County; Castle Hills, China Grove, Fair Oaks Ranch, Grey Forest, Hill Country Village, Hollywood Park, St. Hedwig, Somerset, Von Ormy and Windcrest; to be the sole provider of emergency and non-emergency ambulance transport. In May 2011, Acadian purchased Central Texas Regional EMS In December 2011, Acadian purchased Northstar EMS based in Houston, TX. As a result of this expansion, Acadian also acquired Northstar's operations in North Texas based in Denton County. Also in December 2011 Acadian was awarded the 911 Contract for Liberty County, which was previously held by Guardian. At the same time, an unexpected expansion also occurred in Jefferson County Texas as Southeast Texas EMS went out of business. This would have left much of the county without an ambulance provider had Acadian not filled the void immediately. On December 27, 2010, while transporting a pregnant patient, an Acadian Ambulance unit collided into the rear of a sugar cane truck near Brusly, Louisiana. The patient they were transporting did deliver her baby through Caesarean section, but remained critically injured. The lawsuit following the crash, Peggy Ross, et al v. Michael Averette, et al resulted in jury awarding $116,939,241 in damages on August 1, 2012. 
