 Albany Medical College (AMC) is a medical school located in Albany, New York, United States. It was founded in 1839 by Amos Dean, Dr. Thomas Hun and others, and is one of the oldest medical schools in the nation. The college is part of the Albany Medical Center, which includes the Albany Medical Center Hospital. Along with Albany College of Pharmacy, Albany Law School, the Dudley Observatory, the Graduate College of Union University, and Union College, it is one of the constituent entities of Union University. Over its 170 year history, Albany Medical College has attracted and produced many leaders in medicine and research. Among its present and past faculty, researchers, and alumni count two Nobel Prize winners, two Lasker Award winners, two MacArthur Fellowship recipients, one Gairdner Foundation International Award winner, former Surgeon General of the United States Army, former Surgeon General of the United States Air Force, several presidents and CEOs of major academic hospitals, as well as an early president and co-founder of the American Medical Association. AMC is attributed as the site where David S. Sheridan perfected the modern-day disposable catheter, among other major discoveries and innovations. Among AMC alumni accomplishments include the discovery of the hormone leptin, the invention of computed tomography, and the discovery of oral rehydration therapy. There are multiple courses of study at the College, with tracks that end in an MD degree, as well as a Graduate Studies program with the following departments: Also available at AMC are residencies in Anesthesiology; Emergency Medicine; Family Medicine; Internal Medicine; Medicine/Pediatrics; Neurology; Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences; Ophthalmology; Pathology; Pediatrics; Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; Psychiatry; Radiology; General Surgery; Neurosurgery; Orthopaedic Surgery; Otolaryngology; Plastic Surgery; Thoracic Surgery; and Urological Surgery. Fellowships are available in Cardiology, Endocrinology, Gastroenterology, Geriatrics, Hematopathology, Neonatology, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Rheumatology, Vascular and Interventional Radiology, and Vascular Surgery. In addition to the traditional medical school application process, Albany Medical College reserves up to 50 places in its first year class for participants in combined-degree programs. Students from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Union College and Siena College complete certain undergraduate requirements prior to matriculation at Albany Medical College, then finish their undergraduate degrees at Albany Medical school while concurrently earning their MDs. Programs range from a total of seven to eight years. The AMC Physician Assistant Program was established in 1972,in collaboration with Hudson Valley Community College. Its graduates received from HVCC the A.A.S. in Physician Assistant Studies, and a certificate of completion from AMC. Since 2005, the program has granted a Master of Science in PA studies. The program's rigorous curriculum consists of a variety of courses in basic and medical science within four didactic terms and an additional twelve months of medical rotations. The Alden March Bioethics Institute (AMBI) is a multi-institutional bioethics research organization based at the Albany Medical College in New York. 26 faculty originate first-rate scholarship with the support of more than $3 million in federal and foundation grants. The Institute until recently housed The American Journal of Bioethics (AJOB) and bioethics.net. Its faculty direct a number of graduate programs including those offering the M.S. and Ph.D. • In 1899, famous physician and proclaimed "Father of Modern Medicine" Sir William Osler charged the graduating students of the Albany Medical College to "care more particularly for the individual patient than for the special features of the disease" during a famous address. This quote has since been paraphrased as, "Care for the patient, not the disease." • JD (Scrubs), the main character from Scrubs (TV Show), is based on Dr. Jonathan Doris, MD class of 1998, who is a long time friend of Bill Lawrence (producer). • As the only level-1 trauma center and academic medical center for the 25 county region between New York and Montreal, AMC attendings, residents, and students are often the first to see unique pathology arising from the area population of over two million. The center regularly treats patients from Western New England, Southern Quebec, and Upstate New York. 
