 Alport syndrome or hereditary nephritis is a genetic disorder characterized by glomerulonephritis, endstage kidney disease, and hearing loss. Alport syndrome can also affect the eyes (lenticonus). The presence of blood in the urine (hematuria) is almost always found in this condition. It was first identified in a British family by Dr. Cecil A. Alport in 1927, though William Howship Dickinson is considered by some to have made contributions to the characterization. Alport syndrome is caused by mutations in COL4A3, COL4A4, and COL4A5, collagen biosynthesis genes. Mutations in any of these genes prevent the proper production or assembly of the type IV collagen network, which is an important structural component of basement membranes in the kidney, inner ear, and eye. Basement membranes are thin, sheet-like structures that separate and support cells in many tissues. When mutations prevent the formation of type IV collagen fibers, the basement membranes of the kidneys are not able to filter waste products from the blood and create urine normally, allowing blood and protein into the urine. The abnormalities of type IV collagen in kidney basement membranes cause gradual scarring of the kidneys, eventually leading to kidney failure in many people with the disease. Progression of the disease leads to basement membrane thickening and gives a "basket-weave" appearance from splitting of the lamina densa. Single molecule computational studies of type IV collagen molecules have shown changes in the structure and nanomechanical behavior of mutated molecules, notably leading to a bent molecular shape with kinks. Alport syndrome can have different inheritance patterns that are dependent on the genetic mutation. Gregory et al., 1996, gave the following 10 criteria for the diagnosis of Alport syndrome (four of the 10 criteria must be met): The use of eye examinations for screening has been proposed. A review of pathogenic mutations detected in X-linked Alport syndrome patients in 2011, recommended COL4A5 analysis in any patient meeting at least two clinical diagnostic criteria and that COL4A3 and COL4A4 analysis should be considered if a COL4A5 mutation is not detected and primarily if autosomal inheritance is suspected. Clinical utility gene card for: Alport syndrome. Immunohistochemical (IHC) evidence of the X-linked form Alport syndrome may be obtained from biopsies of either the skin or the renal glomerulus. In this processes, antibodies are used to detect the presence or absence of the alpha3, alpha4, and alpha5 chains of collagen type 4. All three of these alpha chains are present in the glomerular basement membrane of normal individuals. In individuals expressing the X-linked form of Alport's syndrome, however, the presence of the dysfunctional alpha5 chain causes the assembly of the entire collagen 4 complex to fail, and none of these three chains will be detectable in either the glomerular or the renal tubular basement membrane. Of these three alpha chains, only alpha5 is normally expressed in the skin, so the hallmark of X-linked Alport syndrome on a skin biopsy is the absence of alpha5 staining. As there is no known cure for the condition, treatments are symptomatic. Patients are advised on how to manage the complications of kidney failure and the proteinuria that develops is often treated with ACE inhibitors, although they are not always used simply for the elevated blood pressure. Once kidney failure has developed, patients are given dialysis or can benefit from a kidney transplant, although this can cause problems. The body may reject the new kidney as it contains normal type IV collagen, which may be recognized as foreign by the immune system. Gene therapy as a possible treatment option has been discussed. ARUP COL4A5 gene variant database LOVD Alport gene variant databases (COL4A5, COL4A3, COL4A4) This article incorporates public domain text from The U.S. National Library of Medicine 
