 A phobia (from the Greek φόβος, mean "fear" or "morbid fear") is a strong fear for some things/situations/people. Each is otherwise a great fear. For most people, these fears are minor. Such fears can be very common. Those who suffer, usually very strongly want to avoid (keep away from) what they fear. People with arachnophobia, for example, are scared of spiders, and want to keep away from the places where they might find spiders. Fear may be affected resist various common situations (take the elevator, go over the bridge ..). They refuse because of the phobia better place to work (work stations above; more frequent contact with people ..). People with disabilities have their nonsense conscious behavior but it can not dominate. Most phobias are acquired in childhood, but can also develop in adults. A Phobia is different from normal fear in many ways: It is hard to tell how many people suffer from phobias; numbers indicate though that between 5 and 13 percent seem to have a phobia. Women suffer from phobias about twice as often. Every child is afraid of something. For most children, these fears eventually disappear. If fear does not interfere with the child's everyday life or if he does not need large so concerns are unnecessary. Causes and risk factors phobias is very. It can be caused by: Phobia sort the different species. Examples are: also psychological phobias. These include hundreds of types phobias. Some: Social phobia is fear for some interpersonal contact. Victim has low self-esteem, fear of public humiliation, a bad rating, fear of ridicule. This includes for example: Zoophobia is fear of one, several, or all animals. Specific phobia of animals: When a person with a phobia is exposed to their fear (encounters with the stimulus, think of it, sees the object of fear in the picture...) occur at these physical and psychological symptoms. Intensity depends on the degree of fear. Psychological symptoms are symptoms that take place within a human. These include the: There are different ways to help people with phobias. There is treatment available; it focuses on making the patient less sensitive to the fear they suffer from, or showing him or her how the cycle of fear works. There is also medication available (mostly sedatives) that help people cope. Finally there are self-help groups. List of phobias 
