 The American Osteopathic Board of Neurology and Psychiatry (AOBNP) is an organization that provides board certification to qualified Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) who specialize in disorders of the nervous system (neurologists) and to qualified Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine who specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders (psychiatrists). The board is one of 18 medical specialty certifying boards of the American Osteopathic Association Bureau of Osteopathic Specialists (AOABOS) of the American Osteopathic Association (AOA). Established in 1941, the AOBNP is responsible for examining DOs who have completed an AOA-approved residency training in neurology and/or psychiatry. The purpose of the certification examination is to ensure that physicians who have completed the required training have a high level of competency and therefore can safely provide services to their patients which meets a well established standard of care. Physicians who successfully pass both parts of the examination are recommended by the AOBNP to the AOABOS for certification. The AOABOS holds the ultimate authority in conferring board certification. The AOBNP is one of two certifying boards for neurologists and psychiatrists in the United States. The other certifying authority is the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology, Inc. (ABPN), a member board of the American Board of Medical Specialties. As of December 2011, there are 486 osteopathic neurologists and psychiatrists who hold active primary board certification with the AOBNP. A total of 38 physicians hold a Certificate of Special Qualifications in Child Psychiatry and 3 physicians hold a Certificate of Special Qualification in Child Neurology. A total of 41 physicians hold a Certificate of Added Qualification in at least one of the five subspecialty areas of neurology and psychiatry. There are ten elected members of the AOBNP. Each member is an AOA board-certified physician, certified through the AOBNP. Membership includes a representative from each area of neurology (4), psychiatry (4), child neurology (1), child psychiatry (1) and a representative from each of the time divisions of the United States whenever possible. The administrative responsibilities of the Board rest with the Executive Director, with the day-to-day functioning carried out by the Administrator. AOBNP certification requires: the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree from an AOA accredited college of Osteopathic Medicine, at least 2 years of AOA membership, completion of 3 years of training in an AOA approved neurology or psychiatry residency program following 1 year of training in a AOA approved rotating internship program, an active and unrestricted medical license in at least one state in the United States and passing of required board examinations after payment of required fees. Although the ABPN has formally eliminated the Part II oral and clinical skills examinations as a certification requirement, the AOBNP continues to require oral and clinical skills testing to attain board certification. Physicians who successfully complete the certification process are referred to as diplomates. As of January 1, 1996, the AOBNP presents diplomates with a numbered certificate that is valid for 10 years. Diplomates are required to seek recertification after 10 years. Osteopathic neurologists and psychiatrists may receive Certification of Special Qualifications in the following areas: 
