 Arthrogryposis, also known as arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC), is a rare congenital disorder that is characterized by multiple joint contractures and can include muscle weakness and fibrosis. It is a non-progressive disease. The disease derives its name from Greek, literally meaning 'curved or hooked joints.' There are many known subgroups of AMC, with differing signs, symptoms, causes etc. In some cases, few joints may be affected and may have a nearly full range of motion. In the most common type of arthrogryposis, called amyoplasia, hands, wrists, elbows, shoulders, hips, feet and knees are affected. In the most severe types, nearly every joint is involved, including the jaw and back. Frequently, the contractures are accompanied by muscle weakness, which further limits movement. AMC is typically symmetrical and involves all four extremities with some variation seen. Some of the different types of AMC include: There are numerous symptoms for this group of conditions. Some of the more common signs and symptoms are associated with the shoulder (internal rotation), elbow (extension and pronation), wrist (volar and ulnar), hand (fingers in fixed flexion and thumb-in-palm), hip (flexed, abducted and externally rotated, often dislocated), knee (flexion) and foot (clubfoot). Complications may include scoliosis, pulmonary hypoplasia, respiratory problems, growth retardation, midfacial hemangioma, facial and jaw variations, and abdominal hernias. Cognition and language are usually normal. The cause is unknown, although several mechanisms have been suggested. This includes hyperthermia of the fetus, prenatal virus, fetal vascular compromise, septum of the uterus, decreased amniotic fluid, muscle and connective tissue developmental abnormalities. In general, the causes can be classified into extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Research has shown that anything that prevents normal joint movement before birth can result in joint contractures. The joint itself may be normal. However, when a joint is not moved for a period of time, extra connective tissue tends to grow around it, fixing it in position. Lack of joint movement also means that tendons connecting to the joint are not stretched to their normal length; short tendons, in turn, make normal joint movement difficult. (This same kind of problem can develop after birth in joints that are immobilized for long periods of time in casts.) The principal cause of AMC is believed to be decreased fetal movements (akinesia) caused by maternal or fetal abnormalities. It is associated with neurogenic and myopathic disorders. It is believed that the neuropathic form of AMC involves a deterioration in the anterior horn cell leading to muscle weakness and fibrosis. In most cases, arthrogryposis is not a genetic condition and does not occur more than once in a family. In about 30% of the cases, a genetic cause can be identified. The risk of recurrence for these cases varies with the type of genetic disorder. There is a rare autosomal recessive form of the disease known to exist. To date, no prenatal diagnostic tools are available to test for the condition. Diagnosis is only used to rule out other causes. This is done by undertaking muscle biopsies, blood tests and general clinical findings rule out other disorders and provides evidence for AMC. While there is no reversal of this condition, individual quality of life can be greatly improved. As each person will respond differently, and will have different needs, a combination of therapies is beneficial. Physical therapy including stretching, strengthening, and mobility training are often provided to improve flexion and range of motion to increase mobility. Occupational therapy (may also include casting, splinting of affected joints) can include training in ADL and fine motor skills as well as addressing psychosocial and emotional implications of living with a disability. Since there is a variety of mobility impairments, individually tailored orthopaedic correction is often beneficial. Orthopedic surgery, which include osteotomy or external Ilizarov fixator, may be elected to correct severely affected joints and limbs and symptoms such as clubfoot, hernia repair and correction of unilateral hip dislocation, in cases where these surgeries improve quality of life. However, in most cases, the contractures would recur despite surgery. A surgery called Tendon Release is usually done to stretch out the tendon that makes most patients walk on their toes. Individuals with AMC are aided by vigorous therapy and in some cases surgical intervention. This varies to some degree, depending on the severity of mobility reduction. AMC is not a progressive disorder. Typically these individuals have normal cognition and speech and therefore the potential for productive, rewarding, and independent lives. AMC is relatively rare occurring in 1 out of every 3,000 live births. Amyoplasia, characterized by fatty and fibrous tissue replacement of the limb muscles, is the most common form, at 43% of reported cases. The majority of individuals thrive, with a minority strongly affected by respiratory muscle involvement. 
