 Ataque de nervios (also known as Puerto Rican syndrome) is a psychological syndrome that most associated with Spanish-speaking people from the Caribbean although recognized widely in Latin Americans and Hispanic and Latino Americans. Ataque de nervios translates into English as 'attack of nerves' although it is used in its common cultural form to refer to a specific pattern of symptoms, rather than being a general term for feeling nervous. It is classified in Western psychiatry and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders as a culture-bound syndrome. Ataque de nervios can also be defined as an idiom of distress principally reported among Latinos from the Caribbean but recognized among many Latin American and Latin Mediterranean groups. Ataque de nervios can present as a quiet panic attack, crying, or as a violent psuedoseizure. The victim of an ataque de nervios expresses feeling discomfort, sadness, fear, and when recognized by the person's culture which is usually of Latino origin is seen as interferring with daily functioning. Commonly reported symptoms include uncontrollable shouting, attacks of crying, trembling, heat in the chest that rises to the head and verbal and physical aggression. Dissociative symptoms, seizure-like or fainting episodes and suicidal gestures are prominent in some attacks and absent in others. A general feature of ataque de nervios is a sense of being out of control. Ataque de nervios frequently occurs as a direct result of a stressful event relating to the family (news of death of a close relative). People may experience amnesia for what occurred during the ataque de nervios, but they otherwise return rapidly to their usual level of functioning. Ataques span the range from normal expressions of distress not associated with having a mental disorder to symptom presentations associated with the diagnoses of Anxiety, Mood, Dissociative, Or Somatoform disorders. Ataques de Nervios and Somatic complaints among island and mainland Puerto Rican children, define Ataques de Nervios as an attack on the nerves that produces neurological symptoms. This study found that children with the disorder tend to have a lifelong diagnosis of asthma or headaches, stomach aches, and epilepsy. Ataque de Nervios was first mentioned in Puerto Rico by the US military psychiatrists who were working there. A young Puerto Rican was experiencing unusual illness. Commonly reported aspects of the syndrome include screaming or shouting uncontrollably, attacks of crying or trembling, a sensation of heat rising in the chest and into the head, with verbal and physical aggression. Dissociative experiences, seizure-like or fainting episodes and self-harm or suicide attempts appear in some ataques but not others. The reaction is usually associated with a stressful event relating to the family, although it is not specifically defined as arising from such occurrences and may arise from other presumed triggers or without a clear precipitating event. The differential rate of association between anxiety sensitivity and the two types of attacks may signify that ADNs and PAs are distinct from one another. This finding is consistent with the DSM-IV's assertion that the fear and apprehension that are associated with PAs are often absent in ADNs, and that in the latter case the distress is described and experienced as an acceptable expression of distress.6 Ataque de nervios has been frequently compared to the western panic attack, however, there are many differences and they are considered two separate syndromes. With regard to the two syndromes is that only 13 out of the 342 participants reported having experienced both a PA and an ADN. Participants' ability to differentiate the two syndromes supports the conceptualization of these syndromes as separate constructs. Taken together these results indicate that although PAs and ADNs are similar, risk factors (ASI and trauma), specific symptom endorsement, treatment history, and syndrome endorsement differentiate the two and partially support the DSM-IV assertion that ADNs and PAs are distinct syndromes. Studies have examined fear in relationship to fear and found: mental fear, shakiness, tight chest, palpitations, and a sense of inner heat to be the best determinates of the severity of ataque de nervios. Results from further studies show that dissociative symptoms increase the frequency of ataque de nervios. If encountered in the US, psychiatrists usually approach it as a response to traumatic experiences (post-traumatic stress disorder). . Some doctors are taking a psychodynamic approach for the illness. They are merging the psychodynamic approach with narrative therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy practices. Doctors feel that these factors together may aid in their help of treating Ataque de Nervios more specifically. 
