 Atypical depression or depression with "atypical features" is a specifier, of a current or most recent Major Depressive Episode or component of Dysthymic Disorder. Despite its name, "atypical" depression is not meant to connote uncommon or unusual clinical presentation. Up to 40% of the depressed population may be classified as having atypical depression. It shares many of the typical symptoms of a Major Depressive Episode, but being characterized by mood reactivity in response to positive events. In contrast, sufferers specified with "melancholic features" generally do not experience an improvement in mood, even in reaction to pleasurable stimuli. Additionally, atypical depression is characterized by significant weight gain or an increased appetite, hypersomnia, a heavy sensation in the limbs and interpersonal rejection sensitivity that results in significant social or occupational impairment. Atypical depression is two to three times more common in women than in men. Individuals with atypical features tend to report an earlier age of onset (e.g. while in high school) in their depressive episode, which also tend to be more chronic and only have partial remission between episodes. Younger individuals may be more likely to have atypical features, whereas, older individuals may more often have episodes with melancholic features. Atypical depression is more common in individuals with Bipolar I, Bipolar II, and Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, with seasonal pattern. The DSM-IV-TR defines Atypical Depression as a subtype of Major Depressive Disorder with Atypical Features, characterized by: a) Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive events) b) At least two of the following: c) Criteria are not met for With Melancholic Features or With Catatonic Features during the same episode. In general, atypical depression tends to cause greater functional impairment than other forms of depression. Atypical depression is a chronic syndrome that tends to begin earlier in life than other forms of depression — usually beginning in the teenage years. Similarly, patients with atypical depression are more likely to suffer from personality disorders and anxiety disorders such as: Borderline Personality Disorder, Avoidant Personality Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, and Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. Recent research suggests that young people are more likely to suffer from hypersomnia while older people are more likely to suffer from polyphagia. Medication response differs between chronic atypical depression and acute melancholic depression. Some studies suggest that the older class of antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), may be more effective at treating atypical depression. While the more modern SSRIs and SNRIs are usually quite effective in this illness, the tricyclic antidepressants typically are not. In addition, antidepressant responses can often be enhanced with supplimental medications, such as Bupropion or the atypical antipsychotic, Abilify, which creates a combination treatment, and are offered additional effectiveness combined with psychotherapy. It is important to remember that such co-morbid syndromes as panic disorder may not be fully treated without additional medication(s). Some experts hypothesize that atypical depression may be related to thyroid dysregulation. Some studies have found subtle thyroid abnormalities in people with atypical depression. Another study suggests that patients may benefit from triiodothyronine, a medication used to treat hypothyroidism. 
