 The Australian Society of Anaesthetists is an association that seeks to further the best interests of anaesthesia and anaesthetists. Dr Geoffrey Kaye, a 28-year-old Australian physician, returned from travel abroad in 1931 determined to form a society devoted to the practice and teaching of anaesthesia. A proposed anaesthetic Congress of 1932 was delayed by the Great Depression, but took place in Hobart in 1934. At that meeting the Australian Society of Anaesthetists was founded by seven members. It was established as a means of exchange of ideas, for the distribution of memoranda on topics of anaesthetic interests, and to conduct inquiries relating to problems in the practice of anaesthesia in Australia. Since inception the Society has continued to grow in membership. The Society has met annually since 1935 (excepting an interruption during World War II) at both Annual General and Scientific Meetings, the latter now termed the National Scientific Congress. Presently the Society has over 2900 members representing a majority of Australian specialist anaesthetists. It is one of the largest medical associations in Australia. Membership consists of specialist anaesthetist physicians as well as registrar trainees and non-specialist medical practitioner anaesthetists. The Society is governed by a national Council consisting of an executive committee and representatives of the Australian States. The Society holds a National Scientific Conference annually in the southern hemisphere spring. Recent meetings have taken place in Melbourne, Darwin and Wellington. A wide variety of other meetings take place in the various states, such as educational meetings combined with the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists, Part 0 and Part 3 meetings for junior and senior trainees respectively and rural meetings that bring together specialist and general practitioner providers of anaesthesia. The Society publishes a monthly scientific journal, Anaesthesia and Intensive Care. History of Anaesthesia in Australia 
