 The Autism Research Institute (ARI), established in 1967 by Bernard Rimland, Ph.D., is a San Diego, California, based nonprofit that serves primarily as a resource for information on autism and autism spectrum disorders. Stephen M. Edelson, Ph.D. became the director of ARI upon Rimland's death in 2006. ARI was founded in 1967 by Bernard Rimland, Ph.D, a research psychologist. Rimland’s book Infantile Autism: The Syndrome and Its Implications for a Neural Theory of Behavior was published in 1964. Rimland was the first to authoritatively challenge the prevailing theory of the time, the refrigerator mother theory (that autism was caused by unloving mothers), by providing evidence that autism is a biological disorder. He founded ARI to promote Applied Behavior Analysis as an intervention for autism. Today, ARI continues to seek out science-based autism treatments by: In an interview with About.com, ARI Director Steve Edelson said “if a practitioner claims to ‘cure’ autism, run in the other direction.” ARI’s focus is on evidence-based treatments. To that end, the ARI website links to numerous scientific studies that have found improvements in autism symptoms through various dietary treatments such as a ketogenic diet, vitamin/mineral supplementation and a gluten-free/casein-free diet. ARI is a major proponent of the biomedical approach for autism treatment, compiling evidence from autism research experts and parents to share information about the most viable treatments for common autism symptoms. The premise for integrative medical intervention is that certain neurological disorders, including autism, might be caused by environmental triggers that compromise the gastrointestinal, immunological, and neurological systems; gastrointestinal, in that those with autism tend toward constipation and/or diarrhea and often have abnormal cravings or abhorrence for certain kinds of food; immunological, in that many have poor regulation of the immune system; and decreased ability to fight infectious diseases, and some are prone to allergies; and neurological, in that hypo- or hypersensitive to sensory impressions is very common. Proponents of integrative medical intervention claim that children with autism generally improve the health of all three systems with an adapted or 'special' diet, or with the addition to their diet of certain dietary supplements, nutrients, and enzyme supplements. Based on this premise, what is often diagnosed as autism or PDD is seen as a physiological syndrome involving many parts of the body that could be treated as a physiological disorder. ARI is also a longtime supporter of Applied Behavior Analysis, believing ABA should complement other autism interventions. Controversial treatments/issues and ARI’s position today: ARI has awarded more than $1.5 million in research grants since 2009. Grant recipients include Harvard/Mass General, Cleveland Clinic, UCLA, Arizona State University, UC Davis, and Columbia University. ARI also funds Tissue Banks for the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development at the University of Maryland and the Digestive Function Laboratory Repository at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston; a specimen bank for non-autistic individuals to provide proper comparison controls for researchers is in development. ARI holds that autism can be treated through a combination of intensive behavior modification, such as Applied Behavior Analysis, and a wide variety of biomedical interventions, primarily the use of dietary supplements and special diets. To this end, they sponsor a yearly conference (once known as Defeat Autism Now!/DAN!), known as the ARI Conference, of researchers, scientists, and physicians. ARI ended the registry of DAN doctors in 2011. ARI also sponsors the annual meeting of the International Society for Autism Research (INSAR). First convened in 2001, the first and primary aim of the meeting is to promote exchange and dissemination of the latest scientific findings and to stimulate research progress in understanding the nature, cause and treatments of ASD. The meeting also promotes training for pre/post doctorates to advance research of ASD. The ISAR publishes the Autism Research Journal. ARI is a 501(c)3 non-profit organization. Almost all ARI operations and initiatives are funded by private donations. Over 80 cents of every dollar donated to ARI goes directly to programs and research projects. 
