 Banna virus (BAV) is a virus belonging to Reoviridae, a family of segmented, non-enveloped, double-stranded RNA viruses. It is an arbovirus, being primarily transmitted to humans from the bite of infected mosquitoes of the species Culex tritaeniorhynchus. Pigs and cattle have also shown to be vectors of transmission. The most common symptom of infection is fever, but in some cases encephalitis may occur. There is no specific treatment for infection, so treatment should be to alleviate and control the severity of symptoms until the immune system has cleared the infection. BAV is a small (72-75 nm in size), non-enveloped, double-stranded RNA virus surrounded by an icosahedral protein coat. Fibre proteins extend outward from the surface of the protein coat. The genome of BAV is about 19,500 base pairs in length, linear and segmented into 12 parts, encoding for genes VP1-12. Seven of these, VP1-4 and VP8-10, are structural proteins. VP4 and VP9 form the outer protein coat. The inner particles of the coat are composed of VP1-3, VP8 and VP10. VP7 serves as a protein kinase, VP1 as an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, VP3 as a capping enzyme, and VP12 as a dsRNA-binding protein. Because BAV is physically and genetically similar to Rotavirus, it is believed they share a common ancestor. Phylogenetic analysis of the various BAV strains suggests that the BAV-Ch and BAV-In6969 strains were two individual genotypes at one point in time(A and B), before becoming the prototype species for two distinct serotypes(A and B) among all 38 identified strains. Detection of the nucleic-acid of BAV can be performed with a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay to produce detectable cDNA of BAV. This assay provides for a clear mechanism of distinguishing BAV infection from Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), Batai virus, Sindbis virus and Orbiviruses. The assay is about 100 times more sensitive than traditional PCRs, enough to detect about .5 50% cell culture infective dose (CCID-50) of BAV in 50 microliter samples. Banna virus was first isolated from the cerebrospinal fluid of encephalitis patients in Xishuangbanna, Yunnan province, People's Republic of China in 1987. Subsequent identification came in the Xinjiang province and the virus has since been found elsewhere in China, Indonesia, and Vietnam in mosquito populations. Because BAV displays similar symptoms to Japanese encephalitis and the two viruses share their method of transmission, it is possible that some past outbreaks of JE may have been caused by BAV. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has cataloged BAV as an emerging infectious disease due to its geographic spreading in recent history. 
