 Best Bones Forever! is a national bone health campaign that encourages girls ages 9–14 to adopt healthy habits for bone growth and osteoporosis prevention. The campaign was created by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office on Women’s Health in 2009. The campaign uses popular language, bright colors and images, and energetic messages to express a focus on fun and friendship. Best Bones Forever! aims to improve girls’ bone health behaviors, which include eating foods with calcium and vitamin D and participating in regular physical activity. By the end of high school, girls develop up to 90% of their bone mass. Therefore, it is critical that girls ages 9 to 18 build strong, healthy bones that will remain strong for life. Foods high in calcium and vitamin D and 60 minutes of daily bone-strengthening activity will help lower girls’ risk of developing fractures or osteoporosis later in life. Girls between the ages of 9 and 18 need 60 minutes of physical activity a day, including bone-strengthening activities at least three times a week such as running, jumping, hiking, playing soccer, and dancing. Activity levels decrease as girls enter their teenage years. Encouraging girls to adopt physical activity as a lifelong habit or lifestyle may help them remain active throughout life. Campaign partners help Best Bones Forever! bring campaign messages and free materials directly to girls and the adults around them such as parents, health care providers, coaches, teachers, etc. Partners developed Best Bones Forever! products such as t-shirts and charm necklaces for purchase, letting girls become brand carriers and feel campaign ownership. Partners have also placed campaign PSAs in their magazines, event programs, newsletters, and they invite Best Bones Forever! to attend their events. Best Bones Forever! has more than 60 partners, including: National Osteoporosis Foundation, Girl Scouts of the USA, Girls Inc., AllyKatzz.com, Pink Locker Society, Savvy, President’s Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition, American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance, National Association of School Nurses, Women's Sports Foundation. The Best Bones Forever! traveling display, Skelegirls, allows girls to pose as the faces of the campaign’s signature Skelegirls’ bodies. The photos become a souvenir for girls to share with friends, helping to spread awareness of the campaign and its goals. Best Bones Forever! Ambassadors serve as spokespersons for the campaign and role models for girls. ;Julie Zetlin: Julie Zetlin, a rhythmic gymnast, is the 2010 U.S. National Champion and the 2010 Pan American Champion. Her performance at the 2010 Rhythmic World Championships made Julie the first American-born gymnast to qualify for the rhythmic all-around finals at the World Championships. She hopes to earn a spot on the 2012 Olympic team. ;Elizabeth Hawthorne: Elizabeth Anne Hawthorne was the third runner up in the Miss Michigan 2011 pageant with Best Bones Forever! as her platform, and the winner of the Miss America Community Service Award. She has also held the titles Miss Oakland County 2010 and Miss Teen Michigan 2008. In 2011, Elizabeth advocated for Michigan Osteoporosis Day, which aims to raise awareness about the importance of bone health on October 20, 2011. Elizabeth is also a National Osteoporosis Foundation spokesperson. ;Larysa DiDio: Larysa DiDio, celebrity personal trainer and fitness author, has over 20 years of experience in helping celebrities, pro athletes, moms, dads, and kids attain their health and fitness goals. Author of Sneaky Fitness: Fun Foolproof Ways To Slip Fitness Into Your Child's Everyday Life, Larysa has created a handbook that provides busy parents with games and activities to encourage their kids to exercise. 
