 Bhagawan Koirala (Nepali: भगवान कोइराला) MD, FACC (July 24, 1960) is a Cardiothoracic surgeon, professor and Social worker. He is best known for pioneering Open-heart surgery in Nepal, and for starting an operational cardiac care for the public. He started a "Poor Patients Relief" program in 2003, with the support of the Government of Nepal, which focuses on providing free Cardiac care for children, elderly and needy. Koirala completed his schooling from his hometown of Palpa, where he earned his SLC at the young age of 13. He later earned his Certificate in General Medicine from Kathmandu. The interest for a career in medicine took him to Kharkiv, Ukraine, where he graduated from Kharkiv Medical Institute in 1989. He later explained in an interview that he credits his lecturer for encouraging him to earn a career in medicine, specially in the area of Cardiac surgery. He post-graduated from National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Dhaka University, in 1994, and later completed an unaccredited United States Medical Licensing Examination (Step I) in 1996 and (Step II and III) in 2000. He started his residency from a government institution of Nepal, T.U. Casualty and Surgery, in 1989, and got promoted to Senior house officer in T.U. Department of Surgery in 1990. It was followed by the fellowships in the internationally recognized institutions; first as a resident (Cardiothoracic) in Dhaka University in 1991, and later as a resident (surgery) and Clinical Fellow (Cardiac Surgery) in Baystate Medical Center of Massachusetts in 1998 and 1999 respectively. He also completed his tenure as a Clinical Fellow (Cardiac surgery) in The Hospital for Sick Children of Toronto in 2000. Koirala, specializing in pediatric cardiac surgery, started his career from TU Teaching Hospital. He was the Executive Director and Chief of Cardiac Surgery of Shahid Gangalal National Heart Center between 2001 AND 2009.He is currently the Executive Director of TU Teaching Hospital. also known for being a philanthropic organization. He is also involved with different national and international projects and campaigns to ensure funds and charity for needy patients. He has performed over 10,000 heart operations, personally or directly supervised, from 2001 to 2012. Being one of the senior-most surgeon and capable administrator, he was appointed the Director of T.U. Teaching Hospital (TUTH), where he first started his career, in November 2012. Koirala is the member of numerous medical and scientific organizations:- Koirala first performed open-heart surgery in 1997. His initiative gave a hope for treating heart diseases inside the country by establishing the first fully operational heart hospital, and also to ensure free service for the needy. His social initiative came at the time when Nepal completely lacked resources to treat heart patients, and the rate of heart related diseases were increasing in the region. According to a National Report on NCDs and CVDs compiled by NHRC in 2010; MCVTC, headed by Koirala, is famously known for providing medicines at lower prices than the suggested retail price. He also represents the team of Cardiovascular Surgery for Asia Pacific Society of Cardiology's Scientific Council (May 2011 to Feb 2013). He is involved with a charity venture for child heart patients in Nepal, called "Bal Dhadkan". On the venture, he quotes; Koirala has been felicitated and recognized by various institutions over the years. Koirala was born in Palpa, Nepal. He is married to Sandra Koirala, a zoology professor, with whom he has a son. 
