 A biofeedback headband is a self-contained biofeedback unit which is worn on the head and held in place by an elastic strap. Biofeedback headbands are most often used for controlling bruxism during sleep, but can also be used during the day. Clenching is sensed through electromyography (EMG) by picking up microvolt-level muscle signals from the temporalis muscles through black conductive rubber sensor pads which contact the user's forehead and temples when the unit is worn. Modern biofeedback headbands track clenching and grinding activity as well as providing biofeedback. After a night of use, the user can read out of the unit both the number of clenching incidents detected, and the total amount of clenching time accumulated through the night. Biofeedback headbands may also be used to reduce tension headaches and migraines which are caused by bruxism or excessive tightening of frontalis muscle. The first biofeedback headband was invented by Lee Weinstein, in 1998, and patented in September, 2000. Advances were made in the following year and patented in August, 2001. The first headband commercially available for use in the reduction or elimination of bruxism was introduced by BruxCare at the Yankee Dental Congress in Boston, in February 2001. These early units had reliability problems and were re-designed by Holistic Technologies in 2007. The currently available model is sold under the trade name SleepGuard. All of these units use an audio tone as the biofeedback. Prior to the development of the biofeedback headband, biofeedback electronics was typically housed in table-top instruments which connected to a person through a set of wires connected to electrodes which are adhesively connected to the skin. Sleep labs which offer biofeedback or EMG measurement typically use such table-top EMG measurement and biofeedback equipment. Biofeedback headbands have several advantages over tabletop biofeedback machines. Since a biofeedback headband is self-contained and does not require the use of adhesive sensors or a wiring harness, many people find it easier to sleep using a biofeedback headband than using a table-top bedside biofeedback unit. Acoustic feedback from biofeedback headbands is either a forehead-contacting sound transducer or an earphone, both of which have less potential to disturb a sleep partner than a speaker on a tabletop unit. Biofeedback headband sensor electrodes typically last through many more uses than adhesive electrodes, and are much less costly to use over time. Finally, mobility is not inhibited by wearing a biofeedback headband as it is by the wiring harness of typical bedside biofeedback equipment. The original models, introduced in 2001, employed rechargeable batteries which lasted about three days before needing to be recharged. The lithium ion batteries used in those original units unfortunately suffered from a problem that if a unit was allowed to totally discharge (for instance, by being left in a drawer without use for a month or two), the batteries would no longer hold a charge. In the following years, there were a series of improvements to the design, reducing power consumption, and eventually the rechargeable units were replaced with units which run on inexpensive disposable batteries. Modern units such as the SleepGuard biofeedback headband can typically be used for more than 35 nights on a single set of batteries. Users who already suffer from reduced REM sleep due to bruxism may get more REM sleep using a biofeedback headband and may, therefore, experience more restful sleep. However, users whose sleep was not already compromised by bruxism may find sleep less comfortable or restful using a biofeedback headband. 
