 Blood donation in Bangladesh is an activity conducted by several different organisations. As of 2011, about 25% of the nation's blood supply came from voluntary donation, 20–25% from paid donors, and 50–55% from one-time donation for a specific patient. Blood transfusion service became available in Bangladesh at the Dhaka Medical College Hospital in 1950. Professional blood donors were the mainstay of blood donation in Bangladesh, with 47% of donated blood coming from professional donors as late as the year 2000. The potential for contamination in the supply, and the need for volunteer donors was well recognized. An estimate from 2011 is that of the 500,000 units of blood required annually, only 25% come from voluntary donation, 20–25% from paid donors, and 50–55% from one-time donation for a specific patient. The first organized volunteer blood donation program in Bangladesh was begun in 1977 at Dhaka Medical College, and was given the name Sandhani. Today the organization is active in several colleges. The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement began a blood program in Bangladesh in 1981. Today they operate several centres, using both whole blood and fractionated blood components. A 1997 survey of students at the University of Dhaka had found a generally favourable attitude towards voluntary blood donation, and an overwhelmingly unfavourable attitude to paid blood donation, and recommended that a campaign should be started immediately to increase awareness and participation in voluntary blood donation among the student population. Badhan is a non-political voluntary blood donors' organization in Bangladesh that was established in 1997. Badhan's first activity was a free blood-group testing program that took place on 24 October, 1997 at Shahidullah Hall of the University of Dhaka. Shahidullah Hall is very close to Dhaka Medical College and Hospital, and before that time people needing blood for patients would gather regularly in or near the hall gate, seeking help. Md. Shahidul Islam Ripon was a principal originator of the program, along with other students. The blood provided is fresh rather than stored, using a database of people whose blood type has been previously established. The graduate- and postgraduate-level students of Bangladeshi universities and postgraduate colleges are the main participants of the organization. The organization is active in 10 universities and 19 university colleges. Other activities of the organisation include vaccination clinics, and helping with organization in times of natural disasters. Financing comes primarily from individual members and ex-members, as well as from the universities and colleges, from donations, and from funded vaccination clinics. The California non-profit organization SpaandanB has been a significant contributor from outside Bangladesh. 
