 Boarding for Breast Cancer (B4BC) is a 501(c)3 nonprofit foundation that provides breast cancer awareness, education, prevention and support for young people and the action sports community at large. B4BC was founded in 1996 by Lisa Hudson and Kathleen Gasperini with professional snowboarders Tina Basich and Shannon Dunn-Downing. Boarding for Breast Cancer (B4BC) was founded in 1996 to raise awareness about breast cancer. B4BC cites the death of a 26-year old woman who died of breast cancer as a result of complications that arose from delayed diagnosis of the disease as the inspiration for the formation of the group. To increase awareness of the risks of breast cancer in youth populations, B4BC hosted a "Snowboard + Music festival". B4BC now performs educational outreach by advocating at colleges and universities, music festivals and action sports events. B4BC also hosts a nationwide "board-a-thons" nationwide as a platform to advocate for healthy lifestyles. In 2009, B4BC established the Survivor Scholarship Fund which seeks to enhance survivorship by connecting breast cancer survivors to health + wellness retreats. B4BC sponsors and participates in a wide array of events to raise money and awareness for their cause. They set up tents and educate girls about Breast Cancer Awareness at a wide variety of events, from large events such as the Warped Tour and the Winter X Games to the Union Square Street Sessions in Central Park. They also sponsor snowboarding events and rail jams across the country. Their events have attracted several notable music groups including the Beastie Boys, Blink-182, Foo Fighters, Linkin Park, Moby, Less than Jake, Luscious Jackson, Ozomatli, Spearhead, and Supersuckers. Other fundraising efforts include a variety of parties and auctions to raise money for the organization. At a recent auction during SNOWBOARDER Magazine's Superpark event in Keystone Resort, the organization auctioned off dates with single snowboarders, such as Scotty Arnold and Hana Beaman. In 2008, Boarding for Breast Cancer announced that they were assembling a team of athletes to help spread breast cancer awareness among youth populations. Professional snowboarders and surfers on the team include Tara Dakides, Barrett Christy, Hana Beaman, and Holly Lyons. Also, companies including Betty Rides, DC Shoes and Spy Optic have all offered Boarding for Breast Cancer branded products with proceeds benefiting the organization, and information on breast cancer awareness included in the packaging. B4BC's work has recognized by a number of organizations. Notable honors include: Additionally, B4BC has provided financial support to a variety of organizations including: Additionally, B4BC provides scholarships to breast cancer survivors through their Survivor Scholarship Fund, which seeks to enhance survivorship by connecting survivors with health and wellness programing. 
