 Boston University School of Medicine (BUSM) is one of the graduate schools of Boston University. Founded in 1848, the medical school holds the unique distinction as the first institution in the world to formally educate female physicians. Originally known as the New England Female Medical College, it was subsequently renamed BUSM in 1873. It is notably also the first medical school in the United States to award an M.D. degree to an African-American woman in 1864. As the only medical school located in the South End neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts, BUSM and Boston Medical Center, its primary teaching hospital, operates the largest 24-hour Level I trauma center in New England, the largest network of regional community health centers, and possesses the most diverse patient base in New England. BUSM is also the home of the world-renowned Framingham Heart Study - from which all knowledge of cardiovascular disease risk factors were originally discovered. Notable alumni of the medical school include Marcia Angell, former editor-in-chief of the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine and the only woman to hold the position in the journal's almost 200 year history, as well as Louis Wade Sullivan, former Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services and founder of Morehouse School of Medicine. Boston University School of Medicine is ranked 30th on the 2014 list of Best Medical Schools by the US News and World Report. The New England Female Medical College was the first institution to medically train women, founded in 1848. The institution was reformed and renamed in 1873 when Boston University merged with the New England Female Medical College. Upon the renaming, BUSM continued its progressive tradition of medical education for both men and women, and for all races and ethnicities. In the autumn of 2010, BUSM's first year medical students were 52% female, and 19% were of an ethnicity that is under-represented in medicine. Out of the 178 matriculated students, 120 are in the traditional Doctor of Medicine (MD) program. Seven students were enrolled in the MD/PhD program, and the rest were in some other type of non-traditional MD track. BUSM also offers joint degrees with other Boston University graduate schools, allowing the medical students to earn an MD degree with a Master of Business Administration (MBA), Master of Public Health (MPH), or PhD. Over 11,000 people applied for admission to BUSM in 2010, and 171 MD students and 7 MD/PhD students were in the entering class, from 37 states and 19 countries. The acceptance rate for the incoming class was 4.3%. Students' ages ranged from 20 to 40. There are 1,159 faculty members at BU's School of Medicine: 946 full-time and 213 part-time. Notable faculty include Alfred I. Tauber (1982–present), recipient of the 2008 Science Medal awarded by the University of Bologna. Karen H. Antman (2005–present) professor of medicine, Provost and Dean Osamu Shimomura (1982–present) 2008 recipient of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry Graduates of the medical school include former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine Marcia Angell '67, National Scientist of the Philippines Fe Del Mundo '40, angiography pioneer Lawrence Yannuzzi '64, Physician-in-Chief of the Texas Children's Hospital Ralph David Feigin '62, and Louis Wade Sullivan '58, President of the Morehouse School of Medicine and former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services. Graduates of New England Female College (1848–1873), prior to the 1873 merger with Boston University, include Rebecca Lee Crumpler (1864), the first African-American to receive an M.D. in the United States. BUSM offers MA, MS, and PhD degrees through its Division of Graduate Medical Sciences (GMS). GMS offers the MA degree in Bioimaging, Clinical Investigation, Medical Sciences, and Mental Health Counseling and Behavioral Medicine. An MS degree is available in Biomedical Forensics, Forensic Anthropology and Genetic Counseling. GMS also grants PhD or MD/PhD degrees in the following areas: 
