 Basic natriuretic peptide (BNP), now known as B-type natriuretic peptide (also BNP) or GC-B, is a 32 amino acid polypeptide secreted by the ventricles of the heart in response to excessive stretching of heart muscle cells (cardiomyocytes). The release of BNP is modulated by calcium ions. BNP is named as such because it was originally identified in extracts of porcine brain, although in humans it is produced mainly in the cardiac ventricles. BNP is secreted along with a 76 amino acid N-terminal fragment (NT-proBNP) which is biologically inactive. BNP binds to and activates the atrial natriuretic factor receptors NPRA, and to a lesser extent NPRB, in a fashion similar to atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) but with 10-fold lower affinity. The biological half-life of BNP, however, is twice as long as that of ANP, and that of NT-proBNP is even longer, making these peptides better targets than ANP for diagnostic blood testing. The physiologic actions of BNP are similar to ANP and include decrease in systemic vascular resistance and central venous pressure as well as an increase in natriuresis. Thus, the net effect of BNP and ANP is a decrease in blood volume which lowers systemic blood pressure and afterload, yielding an increase in cardiac output, partly due to a higher ejection fraction. BNP less than 100 pg per milliliter BNP less than 50 pg per milliliter The effect or race and gender on value of BNP and its utility in that context has been studied extensively. BNP can be elevated in renal failure BNP is cleared by binding to natriuretic peptide receptors (NPRs) and neutral endopeptidase (NEP) Less than 5% of BNP is cleared renally. NTproBNP is the inactive molecule resulting from cleavage of the prohormone Pro-BNP and is SOLELY reliant on the kidney for excretion. The achilles heel of the NT proBNP molecule is the overlap in kidney disease in the heart failure patient population. The BNP test is used as an aid in the diagnosis and assessment of severity of congestive heart failure (also referred to as heart failure). A recent meta-analysis concerning effects of BNP testing on clinical outcomes of patients presenting to the emergency department with acute dyspnea revealed that BNP testing led to a decrease in admission rates and decrease in mean length of stay, although neither were statistically significant. Effects on all cause hospital mortality was inconclusive. The BNP test is also used for the risk stratification of patients with acute coronary syndromes. When interpreting an elevated BNP level, it is useful to remember that values may be elevated due to factors other than heart failure. Lower levels are often seen in obese patients. Higher levels are seen in those with renal disease, in the absence of heart failure. BNP is also one of the reasons why people will feel the need to urinate after getting into the bathtub or pool. The increased pressure on the body drives more fluid back into systemic circulation which in turn leads to a slight increase in preload. The left ventricle, and to a small degree the left atrium, secrete BNP in response. The natriuretic effect of BNP leads to an increase in urine production. Recombinant BNP, Nesiritide is used to treat decompensated heart failure. However, a recent clinical trial failed to show a benefit of nesiritide in patients with acute decompensated heart failure and the authors could not recommend its use. BNP and NT-proBNP are measured by immunoassay. BNP is standardised whereas NT-proBNP has not been standardised yet. 
