 Brain fag is an example of a culture-bound syndrome. Now a common term for mental exhaustion, it was initially a term used almost exclusively in West Africa. Brain fag can be defined as one's reaction to the demanding tasks or situations of school. Seen predominantly in male students, with symptoms such as depression, difficulty concentrating, remembering, and thinking. Additional symptoms are pain and pressure around the head and neck,and blurring of vision. It has similar symptoms to the Trinidadian illness studiation madness. Medical electricity machines were sold to treat "brain fag" and other "nervous" ailments in England in the late 19th Century. "The term "brain fag" was used in the US as far back as 1852, describing an overworked brain, in 1877 to describe mental exhaustion in professionals similar to neurasthenia, and later in 1919 to describe mental fatigue in the elderly. The term 'fag' is believed to have been derived from 'fatigue'. This American usage declined by the 1950s. The modern African usage was first described in 1960. Brain fag occurs most commonly in sub-Saharan Africa. A Nigerian study in 2002 found that proficiency in English may be a risk factor. In South Africa, another large study found that socioeconomic status, female birth order, and depression were linked to the illness. A possible aetiology may be the "cultural clash" between African and Western societies. Generally brain fag is considered to be a depressive disorder, possibly linked with anxiety disorders. Various possible aetiological aspects are discussed and it is felt that the syndrome is not directly related to genetic factors, intelligence, parental literacy, study habits or family responsibilities. The hypothesis is presented that the syndrome is in some way related to the imposition of European learning techniques upon the Nigerian personality. It is suggested that European learning techniques emphasize isolated endeavour, individual responsibility and orderlines—activities and traits which are foreign to the Nigerian by reason of the collectivistic society from which he derives, with its heightened “orality” and permissiveness. <http://www.springerreference.com/docs/html/chapterdbid/328252.html /> 
