 Breast Cancer Campaign is a breast cancer research charity based in the United Kingdom. The charity's mission is to "beat breast cancer by funding innovative world-class research to understand how breast cancer develops, leading to improved diagnosis, treatment and cure." According to its website, Campaign funds innovative projects only, at centres of research excellence in the UK and Ireland. The charity is currently funding 95 research grants worth £15,630,534 in 33 centres of excellence. Research projects range from studying the genetics of breast cancer to improved methods of treatment. The charity's Chief Executive is Baroness Delyth Morgan, who previously spent ten years as Chief Executive of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, another breast cancer research charity. She was also previously appointed as Children’s Minister, Minister of Intellectual Property and Quality and Government spokesperson for the Department of Work and Pensions in the House of Lords. In 2006, Breast Cancer Campaign asked 56 of the UK’s breast cancer experts for their views on current breast cancer research. The aim was to highlight key gaps in breast cancer research and help to identify the future challenges that needed to be achieved in order to gain the maximum benefit for patients. The study (PDF) was published by open access journal Breast Cancer Research. A second Gap Analysis in now taking place, meeting in October and November 2012. In 2006, Campaign published "The History of Breast Cancer", a report that highlighted the key achievements made in breast cancer research over the last 2,000 years. The report aimed to outline how the money spent on research has not only advanced our knowledge of breast cancer but also directly benefited patients. 1 Breast Cancer Campaign’s most recent wear it pink day was on Friday 26 October 2012. Supporters were asked to wear any item of pink and donate £2 each to the charity. So far the charity has raised over £23 million for breast cancer research from the wear it pink day since the event was launched in 2002. 2 Breast Cancer Campaign sponsors a wide range of sporting and non-sporting fundraising events. These range from running marathons to becoming a regional volunteer. All the money raised from Breast Cancer Campaign’s events helps to fund breast cancer research. In July 2012 HEMYCA was also selected to be the official designer patron for the Breast Cancer Campaign charity, designing a dress for Leah Weller which was auctioned for charity RAISING £3000 and worn at London Fashion Week SS13. On 1 October 2012, buildings across London were lit up pink for the evening to raise awareness of Breast Cancer Campaign and Breast Cancer Action Month. This included Buckingham Palace, the Tower of London, Tower 42, the BT Tower, HMS Belfast, Nelson's Column, Trafalgar Square, Heron Tower and Somerset House. In 2011, Number 10 Downing Street was lit up pink by Breast Cancer Campaign to raise awareness of Breast Cancer Action Month. 
