 A burn is a type of injury to flesh or skin caused by heat, electricity, chemicals, friction, or radiation. Most burns affect only the superficial skin (known as superficial or first degree) or extend into the deeper skin but do not involve the full thickness of the skin (known as partial thickness or second degree). Rarely all layers of the skin or deeper tissues, such as muscle or bone can be injured in which case the burn is either full thickness (third degree) or fourth degree. The treatment required depends on the severity of the burn. Superficial burns maybe managed with little more than simple pain killers while major burns may require prolonged treatment in specialized burn centers. Cooling with tap water may aid pain and decrease damage however if exposure is prolonged it may result in low body temperature. Partial thickness burns may require cleaning with soap and water followed by dressings. Blisters should typically be left unbroken. Full thickness burns usually require surgical treatments such as skin grafting and extensive burns often require large amount of intravenous fluids. The most common complications of burns are related to infection. While large burns can be fatal, modern treatments developed in the last 50 years have significantly improved the outcomes, especially in children and young adults. Globally about 11 million people seek medical treatment and 300,000 people die from burns. In the United States, of those admitted to a burn center, approximately 4% die from their injuries. The long term outcome is primarily related to the size of burn and the age of the person effected. The characteristics of a burn depend upon its depth. Burns around the mouth or singed hair inside the nose may indicate that burns to the airways have occurred but these findings are not definitive. More worrisome signs include: shortness of breath, hoarseness, stridor or wheezing. Itchiness is common during the healing process, being present in as much as 90% of adults and nearly all children. Numbness or tingling may persist for a prolong period of time after an electrical injury. Burns may also produce emotional and psychological distress. Burns are caused by a variety of external sources classified into thermal, chemical, electrical, and radiation. In the United States the most common cause of burns are fire/flame (44%), scalds (33%), hot objects (9%), electricity (4%), and chemicals (3%). Most (69%) of burn injuries occur at home or at work (9%). Most burns are accidental, with 2% due to assault by another and 1-2% representing a suicide attempt. These sources can cause inhalational injury to the airway and/or lungs which occur in about 6%. Burn injuries occur more commonly in the poor. Smoking is another risk factor while alcohol use is not. In the developed world adult males have twice the mortality as females from burns. This is probably due to higher risk occupations and greater risk taking activities. In many countries in the developing world, however, females have twice the risk of males. This is often related to accidents in the kitchen or domestic violence. Fire related burns are generally more common in colder climates. Specific risk factors in the developing world include cooking with open fires or on the floor as well as developmental disabilities in children and chronic diseases in adults. In the United States fire and hot liquids are the most common cause of burns. Of house fires that result in death, smoking was the cause of 25%, and heating devices were the cause of 22%. Almost half of injuries are due to efforts to fight a fire. Scalding is caused by hot liquids or gases and most commonly occurs from exposure to hot drinks, high temperature tap water in baths or showers, hot cooking oil or steam. Scald injuries are most common in children under the age of five and, in the United States and Australia, this population makes up about two-thirds of all burns. Contact with hot objects is the cause of about 20-30% of burns in children. Generally, scalds are first or second degree burns, but third degree burns can result, especially with prolonged contact. Fireworks are a common cause of burns during holiday seasons in many countries. In those hospitalized from scalds or fire burns, 3-10% are from assault. Reasons include: child abuse, personal disputes, spousal abuse, elder abuse, and business disputes. An immersion injury or scald may indicate child abuse. It is created when an extremity or the lower body (buttock or perineum) is held under the surface of hot water. It typically produces a sharp upper border and is often symmetrical. Bride burning, a form of domestic violence, occurs in some cultures such as India where a women is burned due to what the husband or his family considers to be an inadequate dowry. Chemicals cause from 2 to 11% of all burns and contribute to as many as 30% of burn-related deaths. Chemical burns can be caused by over twenty-five thousand substances, most of which are either a strong base (55%) or a strong acid (26%). Most chemical-burn deaths are secondary to ingestion. Common agents include: sulfuric acid as found in toilet cleaners, sodium hypochlorite as found in bleach, and halogenated hydrocarbons as found in paint remover, among others. Hydrofluoric acid can cause particularly deep burns which sometimes do not become symptomatic until some time after exposure. Formic acid may cause the break down of significant numbers of red blood cells. Electrical burns or injuries are classified as high voltage (greater than or equal to 1000 volts), low voltage (less than 1000 volts), or as flash burns secondary to an electric arc. The most common cause of electrical burns in children are electrical cords (60%) followed by electrical outlets (14%). Lightning may also result in electrical burns. Risk factors for being struck include involvement in outdoor activities such as mountain climbing, golf and field sports as well as working outside. Mortality from a lightning strike is about 10%. While electrical injuries primarily result in burns they may also cause fractures or dislocations secondary to blunt force trauma or muscle contractions. In high voltage injuries, most damage may occur internally and thus the extent of the injury cannot be judged by examination of the skin alone. Contact with either low voltage or high voltage may produce cardiac arrhythmias or cardiac arrest. Radiation burns may be caused by protracted exposure to ultraviolet light (such as from the sun, tanning booths or arc welding) or from ionizing radiation (such as from radiation therapy, X-rays or radioactive fallout). Sun exposure is the most common cause of radiation burns and the most common cause of superficial burns overall. There is significant variation in how easily people sunburn based on their skin type. Skin effects from ionizing radiation depend on the amount of exposure to the area with hair loss seen after 3 Gy, redness seen after 10 Gy, wet skin peeling after 20 Gy, and necrosis after 30 Gy. Redness, if it occurs, may not appear until some time after exposure. Radiation burns are treated the same as other burns. Microwave burns occur via thermal heating caused by the microwaves. While exposures as short as two seconds may cause injury, overall this is an uncommon occurrence. At temperatures greater than , proteins begin losing their three-dimensional shape and start breaking down. This results in cell and tissue damage. Many of the direct health effects of a burn are secondary to disruption in the normal functioning of the skin. The includes disruption of the skin's ability to: prevention water loss through evaporation, maintain temperature control, and sensation. Disruption of cell membranes causes cells to lose potassium to the spaces outside the cell and to take up water and sodium. In large burns (>30% TBSA) there is a significant inflammatory response. This results in increased leakage of fluid from capillaries and subsequent tissue edema. There is significant plasma loss with the blood becomes concentrated and less in volume. Poor blood flow to organs such as the kidneys and gastrointestinal tract may result in renal failure and stomach ulcers. Increased levels of catecholamines and cortisol may result in a hypermetabolic state which may last for years. This is associated with increased cardiac output, metabolism, a fast heart rate, and poor immune function. Burns can be classified by depth, mechanism of injury, extent, and associated injuries. The most commonly used classification is based on the depth of injury. The depth of a burn is usually determined via examination, although a biopsy may also be used. It may be difficult to accurately determine the depth of a burn on a single examination and repeated examination over a few days may be necessary. In those who have a headache or are dizzy and have a fire related burn carbon monoxide poisoning should be considered. Cyanide poisoning should also be considered. The size of a burn is measured as a percentage of total body surface area (TBSA) affected by partial thickness or full thickness burns. First degree burns (red only, no blisters) are not included in this estimation. Most burns (70%) involve less than 10% of the TBSA. There are a number of methods to determine the TBSA including: the rule of nines, Lund and Browder charts, and estimations based on a person's palm size. The rule of nines is easy to remember but only accurate in people over 16 years of age. More accurate estimation can be made using Lund and Browder charts, which take into account the different proportions of body parts in adults and children. The size of a person's hand print (palm and fingers) is approximately 1% of their TBSA. In order to determine the need for referral to a specialized burn unit, the American Burn Association devised a classification system. Under this system, burns can be classified as major, moderate and minor. This is assessed based on a number of factors, including total body surface area burnt, the involvement of specific anatomical zones, age of the person and associated injuries. Minor burns can typically be managed at home, moderate burns are often managed in hospital and major burns are managed by a burn center. Historically about half of burns were deemed to be preventable. Burn prevention programs have significantly decreased rates of serious burns. Preventative measures include: limiting hot water temperatures, smoke alarms, sprinkler systems, proper construction of buildings, and fire resistant clothing. Water heaters should be set below . Other measures to prevent scalds include using a thermometer to measure bath water temperatures and splash guards on stoves. Regulation of fireworks appears to decrease the number of injuries caused by them. Resuscitation begins with the assessment and stabilization of the person's airway, breathing and circulation. If inhalation injury is suspected, early intubation maybe required. This is followed by care of the burn wound itself. People with extensive burns can be wrapped in clean sheets until brought to hospital. As burn wounds are prone to infection a tetanus booster shot should be given if an individual has not been immunized within the last five years. In the United States 95% of burns that present to the emergency department are treated and discharged with 5% requiring admission to hospital. With major burns early feeding is important. Hyperbaric oxygenation may be useful in addition to traditional treatments. In those with poor tissue perfusion, boluses of isotonic crystalloid solution should be given. In children with more than 10-20% total body surface area burns, and adults with more than 15% total body surface area burns, formal fluid resuscitation and monitoring should follow. The Parkland formula can help determine intravenous fluids over the first 24 hours. The formula is 4 mL x (percentage of total body surface area sustaining non-superficial burns) x (person's weight in kgs), with half of this volume administered over the first 8 hours, and the remainder given over the following 16 hours. The time frame is calculated from the time at which the burn occurred, and not from the time at which fluid resuscitation was begun. Children require additional maintenance fluid that includes glucose. Additionally those with inhalation injuries require more fluid. While inadequate fluid resuscitation may cause problems over-resuscitation can also be detrimental. The formulas are only a guide, with infusions ideally tailored to a urinary output of >30 mL/h in adults or >1mL/kg in children and mean arterial pressure greater than 60 mmHg. While lactated Ringer's solution is often used, there is no evidence that it is superior to normal saline. Crystalloid fluids appear just as good as colloid fluids, and as colloids are more expensive they are not recommended. Blood transfusions are rarely required. They are typically only recommended when the hemoglobin levels falls below 60-80 g/L (6-8 g/dL) due to the associated risk of complications. Intravenous catheters may be placed through burned skin if needed or intraosseous infusions may be used. Early cooling, within 30 minutes of the burn, reduces burn depth and pain, but care must be taken as cooling can result in hypothermia. This should be done with cool water and not ice water as the latter can cause further injury. Chemical burns may require extensive irrigation. Cleaning with soap and water, removal of death tissue, and dressings are important aspects of wound care. If intact blisters are present it is not clear what should be done with them. Some tentative evidence supports leaving them intact. Second degree burns should be re-evaluated after two days. In the management of first and second degree burns little quality evidence exists to determine which type of dressing should be used. It is reasonable to manage first degree burns without dressings. Silver sulfadiazine (Flamazine) is not recommended as it potentially prolongs healing time. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of silver containing dressings and negative-pressure wound therapy. Burns can be very painful and a number of different options maybe used for pain management. These include simple analgesics (such as ibuprofen and acetaminophen) and opioids such as morphine. Benzodiazepines maybe used in addition to analgesics to help with anxiety. During the healing process antihistamines, message, or transcutaneous nerve stimulation may be used to aid with itching. Antihistamines however are only effective in 20% of people. Tentative evidence supports the use of gabapentin. Intravenous antibiotics may improve survival in those with large and severe burns. There is however concerns that it increases the risk of fungal infections and antibiotic resistance. Due to the poor quality of the evidence, routine use is not recommended other than possibly just before surgery. Erythropoietin has not been found to be effective to prevent or treat anemia in people with burns. Wounds requiring surgical closure with skin grafts or flaps (typically anything more than a small full thickness burn) should be dealt with as early as possible. Circumferential burns of the limbs or chest may need urgent surgical release of the skin, known as an escharotomy. This is done to treat or prevent problems with distal circulation, or ventilation. It is uncertain if it is useful for neck or digit burns. Fasciotomies may be required for electrical burns. Honey has been used since ancient times to aid wound healing and may be beneficial in first and second degree burns. There is little evidence that vitamin E helps with keloids or scarring. In low income countries burns are treated up to a third of the time with traditional medicine which may include applications of eggs, mud, leaves or cow dung. Surgical management is limited in some cases due to insufficient financial resources and availability. There are a number of methods to reduce procedural pain and anxiety for children with burns include the use of virtual reality therapy, relaxation techniques, sensory focusing, distraction, and education. The prognosis is worse in those with larger burns, those who are older and those who are females. The presence of a smoke inhalation injury, other significant injuries such as long bone fractures, and serious co-morbidities (heart disease, diabetes, psychiatric illness, suicidal intent etc.) also influences prognosis. In one large US series of people admitted to burn centres on average 4% of people died. The Baux score has historically been used to determine prognosis of major burns however with improved care it is no longer very accurate. The score is determined by adding the size of the burn (% TBSA) to the age of the person which used to more or less equal the risk of death. A number of complications may occur with infections being the most common. In order of frequency potential complications include: pneumonia, cellulitis, urinary tract infections and respiratory failure. Risk factors for infection include: burns of more than 30% TBSA, full-thickness burns, extremes of age (young or old), or burns involving the legs or perineum. Pneumonia occurs particularly commonly in those with inhalational injuries. Anemia secondary to full thickness burns of greater than 10% of the body is common. Electrical burns may lead to compartment syndrome or rhabdomyolysis due to muscle breakdown. Blood clot in the veins of the legs is estimated to occur in 6 to 25% of people. The hypermetabolic state that may persist for years after a major burn can result in a decrease in bone density and a loss of muscle mass. Keloids may form subsequent to a burn particularly in those who are young and dark skinned. Following a burn children may have significant psychological trauma and experience post-traumatic stress disorder. Scarring may also result in a disturbance in body image. In the developing world significant burns may result in social isolation, extreme poverty and in children abandonment. As of 2004, 11 million burns required medical care worldwide and resulted in 300,000 deaths. This makes it the 4th leading cause of injuries after motor vehicle collisions, falls, and violence. About 90% of burns occur in the developing world. Overall nearly 60% of fatal burns occur in Southeast Asia with a rate of 11.6 per 100,000. In this region of the world fatal burns are twice as common in females as males. In children deaths from burns occurs at more than ten times the rate in the developing than the developed world. Overall in children it is one of the top fifteen leading causes of death. An estimated 500,000 burn injuries receive medical treatment yearly in the United States. They resulted in about 3,300 deaths in 2008. Most burns (70%) and deaths from burns occur in males. The highest incidence of fire burns occurs in those 18-35 year old, while the highest incidence of scalds occurs in children less than five years old and adults over 65. Electrical burns result in about one thousand deaths a year. Lighting results in the death of about 60 people a year. In India about 700,000 to 800,000 people a year sustain significant burns, though very few are looked after in specialist burn units. The highest rates occur in women 16–35 years of age. Part of this high rate is related to unsafe kitchens and loose fitting clothing typical to India. It is estimated that a third of all burns in India are due to clothing catching fire from open flames. Intentional burns occur at high rates in young women in India secondary to domestic violence, while in Europe they occur more commonly in middle aged men. Cave painting from more than 3500 years ago document burns and their management. Treatments described in the 1500  BCE Egyptian Smith papyrus include honey and salve of resin. Many other treatments have been used over the ages including: tea lives by the Chinese in 600 BCE, pig fat and vinegar by Hippocrates 400 BCE, and wine and myrrh by Celsus 100 AD. The classification of burns into 1st to 4th degrees was devised by the French barber-surgeon Ambroise Paré and remains in use today. ;Notes 
