 Camilla Stoltenberg (born February 5, 1958) is a Norwegian physician, researcher, and director of the Norwegian Institute of Public Health. Although she is known for being the older sister to prime minister Jens Stoltenberg, she also has a career as a medical professional, and became well known in her own right due to her role in uncovering an academic fraud case in 2006. In her early life, Stoltenberg was politically active, organizing rallies against the Vietnam War at the age of 13. She was during that period a member of the Marxist-Leninist group Red Youth, and she has in one biography on her father been credited with introducing her brother to political activism. As a student she arranged several debates on issues of psychiatry. In the 1990s, her work for FAFO sent her off for a year to study in Gaza. After getting her position at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, she has worked on the introduction of health registries. Stoltenberg was announced as the new leader of the institute in June 2012, and started serving in August 2012. She had previously been the leader of the institute's Epidemiology division and assistant director of the institute. Stoltenberg's support for health registries have sometimes led to clashes with the Norwegian Data Inspectorate and its leader Georg Apenes, though she said she had a good personal relationship with both the Inspectorate and its leader. In 2004 she said to the NRK health program Puls that the strict anonymity requirements in the patient registries were putting lives at risk. Stoltenberg played a major role in uncovering that a medical article submitted by Jon Sudbø to the Lancet was an academic fraud. She had read the article at the end of 2005 as she was thinking about citing it in an article of her own, but found the content unsettling and sloppy. One particular item that disturbed her was the fine print where the article stated that the patient data was from a cancer database which had not yet opened, a fact Stoltenberg knew as she was in charge of it. Further digging revealed that 250 of the 908 people on the list shared the same birthday. She showed the article to her colleagues on the first day of work in 2006, and the scandal broke January 13 that year. She is the daughter of Thorvald and Karin Stoltenberg, and the older sister of prime minister Jens Stoltenberg and television personality and recovering heroin addict Nini Stoltenberg. She lived in the same building, a house at Nordberg, as Jens Stoltenberg and his wife Ingrid Schulerud since 1991. In the Dagbladet interview, Stoltenberg described a close and good relationship with the prime minister. She has expressed that she prefers to not be looked upon primarily as the prime minister's sister as she once was in the headline "Stoltenberg's sister uncovered the physician fraud" which Verdens Gang ran following the Jon Sudbø case. Stoltenberg was credited by her sister Nini for saving her life when she was found lying dehydrated and starving in her apartment. She is married to architect Atle Aas and they have two children. 
