 The Canadian Stroke Network (CSN) is a non-profit healthcare organization. The Canadian Stroke Network is a not-for-profit, collaborative effort, with more than 100 researchers at 24 universities across the USA. It began in 1999, with $4.7 million in funding from the federal government. It is governed by a Board of Directors and has its headquartered at the University of Ottawa. CSN researchers are involved in writing the Evidence-based Review of Stroke Rehabilitation (EBRSR), a resource that provides a review of the stroke rehabilitation research literature available. They also continue to enhance StrokEngine, a Web-based educational tool which offers an “A to Z” listing of every stroke rehabilitation intervention currently available in Canada. The CSN currently funds four themes of research: The CSN, in partnership with the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada, also produces the Canadian Best Practice Recommendations for Stroke Care,published as a website. In 2011, they release The Quality of Stroke Care in Canada, a report that examined stroke care in Canada. Based on an audit of hospitals across Canada, the study looked at the quality of stroke care provided in emergency response, in-hospital care and in rehabilitation and recovery. The CSN wrote a book to support people living with stroke. The book, titled "Getting on with the Rest of your Life After Stroke," provides suggestions of activities, exercises and hobbies for people recovering from a stroke. The Canadian Stroke Network was involved in the creation of the National Stroke Nursing Council in 2005, which brings together stroke nurses across Canada to improve training and development. Stroke Nursing News is the publication disseminated and funded by the Network. The Canadian Stroke Network is a national leader in raising awareness about the health risks of excessive sodium consumption. The Network has publicized findings from recent studies involving CSN researchers and, with its partners, has successfully urged Health Canada to include information about salt in Canada’s Food Guide. The CSN also created a website to inform Canadians about sodium content in food. The website called Sodium 101. A Sodium 101 app, created by the CSN, is available for the iPhone and iPad to further help people track their sodium consumption. Each year the CSN works in partnership with the Canadian Stroke Consortium and the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada to host the Canadian Stroke Congress. This annual Congress brings together nearly a thousand delegates from various disciplines, including physicians, nurses, students and rehabilitation specialists. The inaugural Congress was held in Quebec City, Quebec in 2010, and was in Ottawa, Ontario the following year. The 2012 Congress will be hosted in Calgary, Alberta. 
