 Cancer Treatment Centers of America (CTCA) is a private, for-profit operator of cancer treatment hospitals and outpatient clinics which provide both conventional and alternative medical treatments. CTCA's headquarters are located in Schaumburg, Illinois. CTCA has five hospitals in the United States, located in Zion, Illinois; Tulsa; Philadelphia; Goodyear, Arizona; and, opened 8/15/2012, Newnan, Georgia. CTCA also operates an outpatient oncology clinic, Seattle Cancer Treatment and Wellness Center, located in Seattle. CTCA was founded in 1988 by Richard J. Stephenson after his mother lost her battle with cancer. Stephenson was unsatisfied with the treatment options available to his mother and opened the first CTCA hospital. The first hospital to open was Midwestern Regional Medical Center in northern Illinois. Cancer Treatment Centers of America was the subject of a Federal Trade Commission (FTC) complaint in 1993. The FTC alleged that CTCA made false claims regarding the success rates of certain cancer treatments in their promotional materials. This claim was settled in March 1996, requiring CTCA to discontinue use of any unsubstantiated claims in their advertising. CTCA is also required to have proven, scientific evidence for all statements regarding the safety, success rates, endorsements, and benefits of their cancer treatments. CTCA was also required to follow various steps in order to report compliance to the FTC per the settlement. Cancer centers and hospitals in general (including Cancer Treatment Centers of America) have been the subjects of some controversy over their advertising. Many doctors and other observers have noted that many cancer organizations' advertising are sparsely regulated and, therefore, often contain unsupported and misleading claims as to the efficacy of their cancer treatments. In 2001, the FDA issued CTCA a Warning Letter concerning three clinical trials that were conducted in violation of FDA requirements. CTCA continues to find itself under fire for cherry picking its patients and denying by using demographics treatment to those whose prognosis would hurt their performance statistics. In at least one case, CTCA appears to have stopped treating a patient so her data would be excluded from its results because it only reports results for patients who remain in treatment. 
