 Cervical cerclage (tracheloplasty), also known as a cervical stitch, is used for the treatment of cervical incompetence (or insufficiency), a condition where the cervix has become slightly open and there is a risk of miscarriage because it may not remain closed throughout pregnancy. Usually this treatment would be done, in the second trimester of pregnancy, for a woman who had either suffered from one or more miscarriages in the past, or is carrying multiples. The treatment consists of a strong suture being inserted into and around the cervix early in the pregnancy, usually between weeks 12 to 14, and then removed towards the end of the pregnancy when the greatest risk of miscarriage has passed. There are three types of cerclage: After the cerclage has been placed, the patient will be observed for at least several hours (sometimes overnight) to ensure that she does not go into premature labor. The patient will then be allowed to return home, but will be instructed to remain in bed or avoid physical activity for two to three days, or up to two weeks. Follow-up appointments will usually take place so that her doctor can monitor the cervix and stitch and watch for signs of premature labor. While cerclage is generally a safe procedure, there are a number of potential complications that may arise during or after surgery. These include: The success rate for cervical cerclage is approximately 80-90% for elective cerclages, and 40-60% for emergency cerclages. A cerclage is considered successful if labor and delivery is delayed to at least 37 weeks (full term). Approximately 1-9% of women will experience premature labor after cerclage. The risk of chorioamnionitis is 1-7%, but increases to 30% if the cervix is dilated greater than 1.2 in (3 cm). The risks associated with premature delivery, however, are far greater. Babies born between 22 and 25 weeks of pregnancy are at significant risk of moderate to severe disabilities (46-56%) or death (approximately 10-30% survive at 22 weeks, increasing to 50% at 24 weeks, and 95% by 26 weeks). 
