 Charles Allen Moser (born 1952) is an American physician specializing in internal medicine and focusing on sexual medicine. Moser is based in San Francisco and focuses his research and practice on individuals in the LGBT, kink, and fetish communities. Described by sex therapist Marty Klein as a national forensic expert, Moser is well known in his field, and he frequently writes to oppose diagnosing paraphilias, dyspareunia, hypersexuality, and other sexual phenomena as disorders. Moser was the 2009 recipient of the Outstanding Contributions to Sexual Science Award from the Western Region of the Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality. Moser served on the Board of Directors of The Foundation for the Scientific Study of Sexuality from 2001 to 2003 and on the Board for the St. James Infirmary Clinic from 2006 to 2008. He was elected a fellow of the American College of Physicians in 2006. Moser received his B.S. in physics from State University of New York at Stony Brook in 1974. He then earned an M.S.W. from the University of Washington in 1975 and a degree from the non-accredited Institute for Advanced Study of Human Sexuality in 1979. He is currently Professor of Sexology and Dean of Professional Studies there. He earned his M.D. from Hahnemann University School of Medicine, a homeopathic medical school, in 1991. He has practiced as a board-certified Internal Medicine physician since 1994. Moser has served as the President of the Western Region of the Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality and is on the Editorial Board of San Francisco Medicine. Publications have included discussions of paraphilia, use of Viagra by women, foot fetishes, nipple piercing, sadomasochism, safer sex, orgasm, and the effects of recreational drugs on sexual functioning. He has stated that the prevalence of sadomasochism is around 10% of the population. The specific paraphilias he has questioned as mental illnesses include pedophilia, hebephilia, sadism, autogynephilia, and zoophilia. Moser's views have been criticized by conservatives. He and Peggy Kleinplatz have criticized aspects of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, arguing for the removal of paraphilias and dyspareunia from the manual. They wrote, "The equating of unusual sexual interests with psychiatric diagnoses has been used to justify the oppression of sexual minorities and to serve political agendas. A review of this area is not only a scientific issue, but also a human rights issue." 
