 Chloropicrin, also known as PS, is a chemical compound with the structural formula Cl3CNO2. This colourless highly toxic liquid was once used in chemical warfare and is currently used as a fumigant and nematicide as a stand alone treatment or in combination / co-formulation with methyl bromide and 1,3-Dichloropropene. Chloropicrin was first discovered in 1848 by a Scottish chemist John Stenhouse. He prepared it by the reaction of a chlorinating agent with picric acid: Because of the precursor he used, Stenhouse named the compound chloropicrin, although the two compounds are structurally dissimilar. Chloropicrin was used famously in World War I. In 1917, there were reports that the Germans were testing and using a new chemical in warfare. That chemical was chloropicrin. While not as lethal as other chemical weapons, it caused vomiting and was a lachrymatory agent. This combination of properties forced Allied soldiers to remove their masks to vomit, exposing them to toxic gases. This caused a large number of casualties on the Italian front. Chloropicrin is manufactured by the reaction of nitromethane with sodium hypochlorite: As listed in the Table, chloropicrin is a colorless liquid that is insoluble in water, with which it is stable. With a vapor pressure of 24 mm Hg, its volatility is between that of phosgene and mustard gas in persistency, although closer to phosgene because it is related to the compound. Tests have shown that chloropicrin causes humans to shut their eyes involuntarily. Chloropicrin can be absorbed systemically through inhalation, ingestion, and the skin. It is severely irritating to the lungs, eyes, and skin. Because of these properties, chloropicrin can only be delivered in shell form as a chemical weapon. Chloropicrin, today, is used as a fumigant to control pests found in the soil. Although less common, it can be used as a poison for vertebrates, such as rabbits. Chloropicrin is commonly used in combination with other fumigants, such as methyl bromide and sulfuryl fluoride, for increased potency and as a warning agent. Chloropicrin has been used in chemical warfare. It first appeared in 1917 when the Germans tested a new chemical weapon on the Italian front. The new chemical weapon was devastating to the Allies at first, since they had never encountered it before. Chloropicrin is a highly toxic chemical: NIOSH 1995 states that: Examples of industrial exposure in humans: 27 workers in a cellulose factory who were exposed to high levels of chloropicrin for 3 minutes developed pneumonitis after 3 to 12 hours of irritated coughing and difficulty on breathing; they subsequently developed pulmonary edema, and one died. EU classification of chloropicrin is: R22 Harmful if swallowed, R26 Very toxic by inhalation, R36/37/38 Irritating to eyes, skin and respiratory system, R43 May cause sensitisation by skin contact, R50/53 Very toxic to aquatic organisms, may cause long term adverse effects in the aquatic environment. Because of chloropicrin's stability, protection requires highly effective absorbents, such as activated charcoal. Chloropicrin, unlike its relative compound phosgene, is absorbed readily at any temperature, which may pose a threat in low or high temperature climates. The use of the substance has been restricted by the U.S. government, although such restriction is outdated now. In the 1987 Movie Dragnet, detectives Joe Friday (Dan Aykroyd) and Pep Streebeck (Tom Hanks) thwart an attempt by mad cultists to release a tanker truck of trichloronitromethane at a party attended by several prominent Los Angeles city officials. The effects cited in explaining the substance (vomiting, suffocation, and death) are consistent with the actual chemical. 
