 Cholinergic urticaria (CU) is one of the physical urticaria which is provoked following sweating events. CU was first described by Duke in 1924. The term cholinergic derives from the finding that hives similar to those of CU can be elicited using cholinergic agonists (e.g. methacholine), thus suggesting the etiology of CU to includes events that are triggered by a cholinergic stimulus. CU presents with a number of small, short-lasting hives that develops usually in response to exercise, bathing, staying in a heated environment, or emotional stress. Although the symptoms subside rapidly, commonly within 1 hour, CU may significantly impair quality of life, especially in relation to sporting and sexual activities. This subtype refers to those with CU who are hypersensitive to their own sweat. Positive reaction to intradermal injection of autologous sweat. Wheals are observed coinciding with perspiration points of sweating. Tanaka et al. found that the sweat-induced release of histamine from basophils is mediated by specific IgE for the partially purified antigen present in the sweat of patients with atopic dermatitis. The sweat hyper-sensitivities of CU and atopic dermatitis seem to be virtually the same, and therefore, the sweat-induced histamine release from basophils may also be mediated by a specific IgE for sweat in atopic dermatitis as well as CU. This subtype refers to those with CU who have abnormally reduced sweating. Sweat is readily visualized by a topical indicator such as iodinated starch or sodium alizarin sulphonate. Both undergo a dramatic colour change when moistened by sweat. A thermoregulatory sweat test evaluates the body’s response to a thermal stimulus by inducing sweating through the use of a hot box ⁄ room, thermal blanket or exercise. Failure of the topical indicator to undergo a colour change during thermoregulatory sweat testing can indicate anhidrosis and/or hypohidrosis (see minor test). Microscopic analysis may include screening of/for the following: Severe heat intolerance (e.g., nausea, dizziness, and headache), and tingling, pricking, or burning pain over the entire body on exposure to hot environments or prolonged exercise which improve after cooling the body. Occurs in the absence of any causative skin, metabolic, or neurological disorders. Uniquely the adrenergic innervated apocrine sweat glands remain functional. Muscarinic cholinergic receptors around sweat glands may be reduced in numbers causing unbound acetylcholine to act on both mast cells and sensory nerve terminals causing urticaria and pain. Unknown or unclassified at this time. Representing those who do not fall under any of the above categories. 
