 Cláudio Luiz Lottenberg (Born on September 6, 1960 in Sao Paulo, Brazil) is a Brazilian physician, executive and politician. He has a master’s and medical degree in Ophthalmology from Escola Paulista de Medicina – UNIFESP (Federal University of São Paulo). He is the second child of industrialist Marcos Lottenberg and grandson of Dr. Simão Lottenberg. All three generations are associated with the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein. Dr. Lottenberg graduated with a medical degree in 1984 from the Escola Paulista de Medicina da Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP). In 1987 he completed a medical residency in Ophthalmology. After the completion of his Ophthalmology residency he received a masters degree in Ophthalmology and in 1994 he completed a doctorate in Ophthalmology, both from the Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo. He served as an Assistant Professor in the Ophthalmology Graduation Course at the Universidade Federal de São Paulo and an Associate Professor at IBMEC (International Business and Management Education Centre) in the MBA Health Care Management program. Dr. Lottenberg is currently serving as the Chairman and President of Sociedade Beneficente Israelita Brasileira Hospital Albert Einstein holding this position since 2001 (Albert Einstein was the first hospital to be accreditted by the Joint Commission outside the USA and is currently ranked as the number one hospital in Latin America by “America Economia”). During Dr. Lottenberg´s tenure, Hospital Albert Einstein has grown three fold in revenue and in assets. Since 2008 Dr. Lottenberg also has served as president of the Jewish Confederation of Brazil (CONIB). He was Secretary of Health of the City of Sao Paulo in 2005 during the government of Jose Serra. Dr. Lottenberg is the President of the Sociedade Brasileira de Laser e Cirurgia em Oftalmologia (Brazilian Laser Ophthalmology Surgical Society - BLOSS) – term 2008/10. Dr. Lottenberg is the author of several medical papers, and co-author of four books in Ophthalmology. He is the author of the book “A Saúde Brasileira pode dar Certo” (Healthcare in Brazil can be fixed) published by Atheneu Publishing Company, 1st. Edition December, 2006. Dr. Lottenberg is frequently invited to give his opinion in articles about health and healthcare. He has served as counselor in many scientific, technical and public health boards, including: 
