 The term cooptation refers to the capacity of intracellular parasites to use host-cell proteins to complete their vital cycle.Viruses use this mechanism, as their genome is small. Because the Influenza A virus genome encodes only for 11 proteins, it needs to use host-cell proteins to carry out its lytic cycle. On 2010 a study was realized to determine which host-cell factors are necessary for the entry and replication of Influenza A virus. Using siRNA techniques, the effect of the disruption of more than 19,000 human genes on influenza life cycle was studied. That allowed identifying 295 host-cell genes needed for the virus to complete its lytic cycle, 23 of which are used during the entry steps, and the 219 remaining for the post-entry steps. Of all these genes implicated on the virus vital cycle, 168 might be targets for developing antiviral drugs for the treatment of H1N1 infection. It is important to emphasize that these targets are not virus proteins, but host-cell proteins. This study starts with the genetic modification of the virus, replacing the region A/WSN/22, which encodes for Hemagglutinin (HA), for the sequence of Renilla luciferase. In this way infected cells which expressing this gene could be visualized because of the luminescence that will emit. Lung epithelium human cells (A549) are transfected with a siRNA that blocks a specific mRNA. Then the virus, modified with Renilla luciferase, is introduced in the culture. This modification allows us to study the steps of the virus cycle from the entry into the cell, up to the transcription/translation of its proteins, that is when Luciferase’s protein it’s synthesized. All further steps can’t be evaluated with this procedure. If Renilla luciferase is expressed is because the siRNA has hit a mRNA not relevant for the virus cycle. In order to avoid false positives a control culture should not be infected. If cell viability is compromised then the siRNA has probably targeted an essential gene and the result of the luminescence assay in the corresponding infected culture should not be taken into account. Cultures are incubated and luminescence assays performed at different times. Possible results and causes are: In order to know which is the role of these proteins in the virus cycle, the following methods can be applied. For a first approximation, the reconstruction of a network of protein-protein interactions incorporating functional information provides us with two types of information. On one hand this network shows us the functional environment of each gene, giving us an idea on its contribution in the virus cycle. On the other hand we can see the relative position that these genes occupy in the protein-protein network. Thus we can see that influenza uses a few central proteins which interact with many other proteins which could be affected without a direct interaction with viral proteins. These nodes make possible that a virus with a small genome controls many guest-cell proteins. Once the genes have been classified depending on their putative participation in the different steps of the virus cycle, a study to identify the factors involved in the entry is carried out. The flu virus has an entry mechanism which needs a pH decrease at some point, whereas other virus’s entry is independent of pH. There are probably three types of cellular factors involved in the entry of the flu virus: - Specific factors for flu entry. - Specific factors for low pH entry. - General factors for virus entry. To classify the proteins within these three categories a pseudotyping assay is performed. This method consists on substituting the virus’s wrapper surface antigens for other proteins typical of other virus’s surface. In the study of the flu virus entry, it is possible to replace hemaglutinine (HA) for protein G of the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) to identify what guest factors are involved in the low pH dependent entry, or substitute for protein ENV of the Murine leukaemia virus (MMLV) to identify the factors involved for the pH independent entry. The viral particles thus obtained are pseudotypated particles (PP). Then, the siRNA analysis is repeated. 
