 Cocaine Anonymous (CA) is a twelve-step program for people who seek recovery from drug addiction. CA is patterned very closely after Alcoholics Anonymous, although the two groups are unaffiliated. While many CA members have been addicted to cocaine, crack, speed or similar substances, identifying specifically as a cocaine addict is not required. CA uses the book Alcoholics Anonymous as its basic text. Complementing this are the CA Storybook, Hope, Faith and Courage: Stories from the Fellowship of Cocaine Anonymous. and the AA book Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions CA was formed in Los Angeles in 1982 by a long-standing AA member. He worked in the film industry and saw a number of people who had difficulty finding help from anyone knowledgeable about the special difficulties presented by cocaine addiction. Recognizing that there was a need for support of family and friends of drug addicts, the group Co-Anon (formerly CocAnon) was formed. Co-Anon is a program for families of cocaine users, analogous to Al-Anon for the friends and family of alcoholics. Cocaine Anonymous is a self-supporting organization that is funded through the contributions of its members. These contributions are collected by "passing the hat" during a meeting, which fulfills the spirit of the 7th tradition of being self-supporting. The funds are then collected and documented by a "trusted servant" who then designates the money to cover the expense of the meeting hall, coffee, snacks, literature, etc. The leftover funds are often dealt with by following the 70/30 plan, in which 70% of the remaining money goes to the district or area and 30% will go the CA World Services office. First Step - We admitted we were powerless over our addiction – that our lives had become unmanageable Second Step - Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity Third Step - Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood God Fourth Step - Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves Fifth Step - Admitted to God, to ourselves and to another rhuman being the exact nature of our wrongs SIxth Step - Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character Seventh Step - Humbly asked God to remove our shortcomings Eighth Step - Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make amends to them all Ninth Step - Made a direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to do so would injure them or others Tenth Step - Continued to take a personal inventory and when we were wrong promptly admitted it Eleventh Step - Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact with God as we understood God, praying only for knowledge of God’s will for us and the power to carry that out Twelfth Step - Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these steps, we tried to carry the message to other addicts, and to practice these principles in all our affairs A 1996 survey of over 1,000 members in North America concluded that CA members who responded to the survey were 68% male and 32% female. The data reports that of the people who responded 32% sober from 1-90 days, 23% sober from 3 months – 1 year, 31% sober from 1-5 years, 15% sober from 5-10 years, and 2% sober for more than 10 years. The same survey said that 37% of members found CA through a recovery program or other 12-Step Group. While only 3% were referred to CA through attending court. CA recommends that members obtain a sponsor in order to help them stay clean and sober. Usually, a sponsor has at least one year sober and has thoroughly worked the twelve-step program in order to achieve this new lifestyle. Their primary aim is to use their experience, along with the twelve-steps, to help a newcomer stay sober on a one-to-one basis. Chips are given out to members to mark their sobriety dates. As time passes the chips will commemorate various lengths of sobriety; 1, 2, 3,6, and 9 months; years and multiples of years. A major criticism that Cocaine Anonymous has received is that they strongly encourage their members to turn to a higher power. Some have compared this approach to organized religion that could potentially be offensive to its agnostic or atheist members. However, the "Big Book" does address this in a chapter titled To Agnostics. 
