 The Combitube, also known as the double-lumen airway, is a blind insertion airway device (BIAD) often used in the pre-hospital and emergency setting. It is designed to facilitate the tracheal intubation of a patient in respiratory distress. It consists of a cuffed, double-lumen tube that is inserted into the patient's airway facilitating ventilation. Inflation of the cuff allows the device to function similarly to an endotracheal tube and usually closes off the esophagus, allowing ventilation and preventing pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. It is available in two sizes: 37 Fr (for patients 4 to 6 ft or 122 to 183 cm tall) and 41 Fr (for patients more than 5 ft or 152 cm tall). The simplicity of placement is the main advantage of the Combitube over endotracheal intubation. When intubating with a traditional endotracheal tube, care must be taken to visually ensure that the tube has been placed in the trachea while the dual-lumen design of the Combitube allows for ventilation to proceed regardless of esophageal or tracheal placement. Generally, the tube enters the esophagus and ventilation is provided through tube number one. In the rare instance where the Combitube intubates the trachea, ventilation is provided through tube number two while tube one is clamped. A device called the Positube, which allows for esophageal intubation detection, can be used on tube number two to rule out the intubation of the Combitube in the trachea. The Positube checks for air flow resistance on tube number two and is very helpful in checking proper Combitube placement when intubation is performed in noisy environment's. The Combitube's ease of use makes it ideal for use in the pre-hospital, emergency setting where advanced level providers capable of placing an endotracheal tube are often not immediately available. The drawbacks of Combitube use center around an inability to perform deep (subglottic) suctioning assuming esophageal placement. While it has been suggested as an option by the American Heart Association and European Resuscitation Council, it is seldom used outside of the pre-hospital, emergency setting, as it does not allow for long term airway control. Alternatives to the Combitube include the laryngeal mask airway, the endotracheal tube, and other BIAD's such as the King Airway. 
