 Autism spectrum disorders tend to be highly comorbid with other disorders. Comorbidity may increase with age and may worsen the course of youth with ASDs and make intervention/treatment more difficult. Distinguishing between ASDs and other diagnoses can be challenging because the traits of ASDs often overlap with symptoms of other disorders and the characteristics of ASDs make traditional diagnostic procedures difficult. In spite of these difficulties, comorbid disorders are readily identified and tend to fall into six categories: medical conditions, intellectual disabilities, anxiety disorders, mood disorders, behavior-related disorders, and sensory processing disorders. A variety of medical conditions commonly occur in individuals with ASDs. The most common is seizure disorder or epilepsy, which occurs in 11-39% of individuals with ASD. Typically, onset of epilepsy occurs before age five or during puberty. and is more common in females and individuals who also have a comorbid intellectual disability. Tic disorder is another common medical condition seen in individuals with ASDs. While only about 6.5% of individuals with an ASD have full blown Tourette syndrome, nearly 30% show some form of tics. Tuberous sclerosis, a medical condition in which non-malignant tumors grow in the brain and on other vital organs, occurs in 1-4% of individuals with ASDs. Sleep disorders are also commonly reported by parents of children with ASDs, including late sleep onset, early morning awakening, and poor sleep maintenance. Intellectual disabilities are some of the most common comorbid disorders with ASDs. Recent estimates suggest that 40-69% of individuals with ASD have some degree of mental retardation, with females more likely to be in severe range of mental retardation. Learning disabilities are also highly comorbid in individuals with an ASD. Approximately 25-75% of individuals with an ASD also have some degree of learning disability, although the types of learning disability vary depending on the specific strengths and weaknesses of the individual. A variety of anxiety disorders tend to co-occur with autism spectrum disorders, with overall comorbidity rates of 7-84%. Specific phobia is the most common comorbid condition over the lifetime for those with ASD, with comorbidity rates of 38-63%. Common phobias for children with ASD include the fear of certain places or situations, the fear of medically related people, places, or things, and the fear of loud noises. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) occurs in 11-35% of individuals with ASD, with 16-81% showing features of the disorder without a full diagnosis. While individuals with ASD exhibit rigid thinking and compulsions, similar to OCD, the repetitive behaviors displayed in ASD (i.e., flapping, spinning, repeating phrases) are distinct and serve alternate functions than the repetitive behaviors displayed in OCD (i.e., checking, cleaning, counting). Social Phobia or Social Anxiety Disorder is seen in approximately 7.4% of individuals with ASD, but is more common in higher-functioning individuals who have a desire for social interactions, but are also aware of their social deficits. Rates of comorbid depression in individuals with an ASD range from 4–58%. The presentation of depression in ASDs can depend on level of cognitive functioning, with lower functioning children displaying more behavior issues and higher functioning children displaying more traditional depressive symptoms. Depression is thought to develop and occur more in high-functioning individuals during adolescence, when they develop greater insight into their differences from others. Bipolar disorder may also be comorbid with an ASD, although it is far less common than many other disorders. Rates of comorbidity vary greatly, but tend to be around 2-8%. Deficits in ASD are often linked to behavior problems, such as difficulties following directions, being cooperative, and doing things on other people's terms These behavior problems are also characteristic of Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and Conduct Disorder (CD), but the reasons for the behaviors often differ. For this reason, comorbidity rates of ODD and CD range from 7% to 73%. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) has ASD comorbidity rates of 30-80%; however, current diagnostic guidelines prevent diagnosing ADHD along with ASD. Rather, ADHD-like symptoms are seen to be part of the ASD diagnosis. Sensory processing disorder is also comorbid with ASD, with comorbidity rates of 42-88%. Three patterns of sensory processing difficulties are commonly seen, hyperresponsiveness (behavioral over-reactivity to sensory stimuli), hyporesponsiveness (behavioral under-reactivity to sensory stimuli), and sensory-seeking (craving or fascination with certain stimuli). These patterns of processing difficulties may be present with auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli. 
