 Cone beam computed tomography (or CBCT) is a medical imaging technique consisting of X-ray computed tomography where the X-rays are divergent, forming a cone. CBCT has become increasingly important in treatment planning and diagnosis in implant dentistry, among other things. Perhaps because of the increased access to such technology, CBCT scanners are now finding many uses in dentistry, such as in the fields of endodontics and orthodontics, as well. During a CBCT scan, the scanner rotates around the patient's head, obtaining up to nearly 600 distinct images. The scanning software collects the data and reconstructs it, producing what is termed a digital volume composed of three dimensional voxels of anatomical data that can then be manipulated and visualized with specialized software. Cone beam technology was first introduced in the European market in 1998 and into the US market in 2001. A dental cone beam scan offers invaluable information when it comes to the assessment and planning of surgical implants. The AAOMR also suggestes cone-beam CT as the preferred method for presurgical assessment of dental implant sites. As a 3D rendition, CBCT offers an undistorted view of the dentition that can be used to accurately visualize both erupted and non-erupted teeth, tooth root orientation and anomalous structures that conventional 2D radiography cannot. Processing example using x-ray data from a tooth model: There are a number of drawbacks of CBCT technology over that of medical-grade CT scans, such as increased susceptibility to movement artifacts (in first generation machines) and to the lack of appropriate bone density determination. The Hounsfield scale is used to measure radiodensity and, in reference to medical-grade CT scans, can provide an accurate absolute density for the type of tissue depicted. The radiodensity, measured in Hounsfield Units (HU, also known as CT number) is inaccurate in CBCT scans because different areas in the scan appear with different greyscale values depending on their relative positions in the organ being scanned, despite possessing identical densities, because the image value of a voxel of an organ depends on the position in the image volume. HU measured from the same anatomical area with both CBCT and medical-grade CT scanners are not identical and are thus unreliable for determination of site-specific, radiographically-identified bone density for purposes such as the placement of dental implants, as there is "no good data to relate the CBCT HU values to bone quality." Although some authors have supported the use of CBCT technology to evaluate bone density by measuring HU, such support is provided erroneously because scanned regions of the same density in the skull can have a different grayscale value in the reconstructed CBCT dataset. Dental CBCT systems do not employ a standardized system for scaling the grey levels that represent the reconstructed density values and, as such, they are arbitrary and do not allow for assessment of bone quality. In the absence of such a standardization, it is difficult to interpret the grey levels or impossible to compare the values resulting from different machines. While there is a general acknowledgment that this deficiency exists with CBCT systems (in that they do not correctly display HU), there has been little research conducted to attempt to correct this deficiency. With time, further advancements in CBCT reconstruction algorithms will allow for improved area detectors, and this, together with enhanced postprocessing, will likely solve or reduce this problem. A method for establishing attenuation coefficients with which actual HU values can be derived from CBCT HU values was published in 2010 and further research is currently underway to perfect this method in vivo. 
