 Daycare Trust is the UK's national childcare charity, campaigning for quality, accessible, affordable childcare for all, and raising the voices of children, parents and carers. Daycare Trust advises parents and carers, providers, employers, trade unions and policymakers on childcare issues. Daycare Trust was established in 1986 and is headquartered in London. It is a registered charity and company. The concept for Daycare Trust emerged in the 1970s in the context of the growing feminist movement. Many women desired both a family and a work life, but the childcare infrastructure was not in place. Additionally, the 1948 Children Act stigmatised parents for "dumping" their children in nurseries, categorising those children as "at risk" and "maternally deprived." Activists, mostly women, from various organisations campaigned to establish nurseries in various places, primarily in colleges and universities. From there they tackled the issue of quality, and campaigned for better professional training. In 1986, a group of these activists established Daycare Trust, creating a unified base of support to carry out the charitable work of the National Childcare Campaign (a coalition of local groups formed in 1980 to campaign for workplace nurseries and better staff training). Daycare Trust's mission is to "secure access to high quality affordable childcare for all children in Great Britain where and when they and their parents want and need it, at a price their parents can afford." The charity defines childcare as "arrangements parents make for their children when they are not looking after the children themselves; this could be in individual or group care in a variety of settings, including at home." Daycare Trust work includes: Daycare Trust conducts independent and robust research on behalf of a number of government departments, charities and research councils. This research aims to “further the availability of sustainable, affordable and good quality childcare to all families; offering real choices to families to balance work and family life”. Daycare Trust provides informed comment on key childcare issues to the media and government, ensuring that the benefits of childcare and the issues faced by parents are well understood. Daycare Trust’s information services benefit over 450,000 people per year. These services consist of a telephone information line, which provides comprehensive information about childcare to callers; e-mail information service; and with factsheets for parents and employers and an interactive. Daycare Trust runs training and consultancy on a range of topics, from tax credits to involving parents in service development and delivery, to a range of organisations and services. The organisation's current policy priorities are set out in the 2010 publication Childcare Charter, published in the run up to the 2010 general election. The Childcare Charter called on the next government to: 
