 Michael E. DeBakey High School for Health Professions is a medical secondary school located in the Third Ward area of Houston, Texas, United States. It has been named the number one public high school in Houston by the Houston Chronicle, the Houston Press, and Children at Risk and number 36 best high school in the US by US News in 2012. DeBakey High School, which serves grades 9 through 12, is a part of the Houston Independent School District and is east of the Texas Medical Center. It is the only HISD magnet high school for health professions. The school was named after Michael E. DeBakey, a famous heart surgeon. DeBakey does not automatically take in students from the surrounding neighborhood; the surrounding neighborhood is zoned to Yates High School. Nearly 1000 students take entrance exams for 200-300 spots, which cover statistical data and procedures. With an initial student body of 45, the High School for Health Professions opened in 1972 as part of a partnership between HISD and the Baylor College of Medicine. Perry Weston was the first principal. In the 1984-1985 school year, of the HISD campuses, DeBakey had the lowest percentage of failing grades. In the fall semester, 7% of grades were failing, while in the spring semester, 6% of grades were failing. The school was renamed after Michael E. DeBakey in 1996. The school was a National Blue Ribbon School award winner in 1997-98 and 2003. Plans for the school to be relocated within the Texas Medical Center were made but soon canceled because the Houston Independent School District decided to renovate instead. Renovations started August 2006 and ended in 2008.1 In 2006 the HISD board considered moving the Kay On-Going Education Center, a special school for pregnant girls, to an unused area within DeBakey High School. DeBakey had around 30 unused classrooms, and HISD administrators argued that the Texas Medical Center location would be of use to pregnant students. Jennifer Radcliffe of the Houston Chronicle said that the proposed plan yielded a "mixed" reaction in DeBakey parents and students. Some signed a petition asking the district not to merge Kay On-Going into DeBakey. Ultimately HISD did not go forward with the plan. Instead it moved into Kay On-Going into the Carter Career Center in the Fifth Ward. The Supreme Education Council of Qatar opened a branch version of DeBakey, DeBakey High School for Health Professions at Qatar, in its country, with Charlesetta Deason, formerly principal of the Houston school, as the head of the Qatar school. In 2012, four DeBakey juniors qualified for the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair, and two--Thomas Kuncewicz and Andy Tran--placed second place in their respective categories detailing chitosan nanoparticles. DeBakey offers pre-advanced placement(PAP) classes in foreign languages, mathematics, science, social sciences, and English in 9th and 10th grade (though physics can be taken PAP in 11th grade), as well as 16 Advanced Placement classes: AP English Literature, AP English Language, AP Spanish Language, AP French, AP World History, AP US History, AP Computer Science, AP Calculus AB, AP Calculus BC, AP Macroeconomics, AP US Government and Politics, AP Physics B, AP Statistics, AP Chemistry, AP Biology, and AP Psychology. The school requires students to fulfill these class requirements to graduate as DeBakey scholars: DeBakey has been widely recognized for its performance in academics, particularly in math and science. The students score an average of a 3.7/5 on their AP examinations, which is higher than the typical average of 3.03. In 2011, DeBakey was ranked number 11 best school for math and science by the USNews Rankings, and it has been recognized each year for black student performance on the AP Calculus AB examination by the College Board. Each year, students are required to take an Health Science Technology (HST) class, which serve as the principle magnet program for the school. The course selection includes: Students ultimately interact and are able to learn first-hand from physicians and surgeons who work at various institutions of the Texas Medical Center. They frequently witness live surgeries there and attend seminars, making the learning experience quite unlike courses offered at other public schools in HISD.2 Students in the school are required to wear school uniforms. In 2010, the school announced that its new uniform code will require students to buy shirts from the parent teacher organization. The shirts must have a DeBakey logo. This led to protests from students and parents who were unwilling to spend additional money on school-mandated clothes; DeBakey's student body as of that year was 55% free lunch or reduced lunch. As of 2010-2011 school year, the school was made up of 58% female and 42% male students. Of these, 23% were African American, 37% were Asian, 30% were Hispanic, <1% were Native American, and 8% were White. 100% of DeBakey students passed the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS), and 100% of the class completed their four years at the school. Nearly half of the class was on free or reduced lunch. 3 The school offers more than twenty-five clubs. Clubs include Health Occupation Students of America, BSU (Black Student Union), VISA (Vietnamese International Student Association), OLA (organization for Latin Americans), DeBakey Music Club, the Filipino American club (Fil-Am), honor societies including chapters of the BETA club, the National Honor Society, and the Spanish National Honor Society. Typically students score higher than average schools on the SAT and the ACT, scoring an average composite 1829 and 27.1 respectively, and perform exceptionally well on state tests. Almost all students attending DeBakey graduate from high school. As of 2011 DeBakey's per-pupil spending was $8,807 per student, $1,450 over the Greater Houston average, $7,355. Houston ISD provides bus transportation to students who live more than two miles from DeBakey or students with major transportation obstacles. Many students choose to ride the bus, as many live more than eight to twenty miles away from the campus. The average time to reach the school by riding a school bus is one hour even for students who live relatively close to the school because some buses travel to multiple stops; other students choose to carpool or drive themselves to school. METRO routes that serve DeBakey High School include 60 (South MacGregor/Hardy) and 68 (Brays Bayou Crosstown). DeBakey's official mascot is the viper, and some important school days that it celebrates include: DeBakey has no feeder patterns since it is a magnet school, so no students are zoned to it. DeBakey takes children from many Houston ISD middle schools. Some students who are enrolled in private schools in the 8th grade choose to go to DeBakey for high school. Most DeBakey students end up at either the University of Houston or the University of Texas at Austin after graduation. A unique program specifically for DeBakey graduates known as the UH-Baylor program allows around 10 DeBakey students to be guaranteed admission to the Baylor College of Medicine after four years of classes at the University of Houston. A considerable amount attend private Texas schools such as Trinity University, Baylor University, University of St. Thomas, and Houston Baptist University, as well as out of state colleges such as Knox College, Loyola University New Orleans, and Case Western University. DeBakey graduates are also represented in the nation's leading national universities such as Harvard University, Rice University, University of California at Berkeley, Stanford University, Northwestern University, the University of Chicago, Notre Dame University, Emory University, University of Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as in top liberal arts colleges such as Amherst College, Pomona College, and Colgate University. 
