 Dermatopathology (from Greek , derma, "skin"; , pathos, "fate, harm"; and , -logia) is a subspecialty of both dermatology and surgical pathology that focuses on the study of cutaneous diseases at a microscopic level. It also encompasses analyses of the potential causes of skin diseases at a cellular level. Dermatopathologists work in close association with dermatologists. In fact, some of them are trained primarily in dermatology themselves. Dermatologists are able to recognize most skin diseases based on their appearances, anatomic distributions, and behavior. Sometimes, however, those criteria do not allow a conclusive diagnosis to be made, and a skin biopsy is taken to be examined under the microscope. That process reveals the histology of the disease and results in a specific diagnostic interpretation. In some cases, additional specialized testing needs to be performed on biopsies, including immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, flow cytometry, and molecular-pathologic analysis. One of the greatest challenges of dermatopathology is its scope. More than 1500 different disorders of the skin exist, including cutaneous eruptions ("rashes") and neoplasms. Therefore, dermatopathologists must maintain a broad base of knowledge, and be familiar with several other specialty areas in Medicine. Certification in dermatopathology in the United States requires the completion of a medical degree, followed by residency training of 3 years in dermatology or 3 years in anatomic pathology (often completed as part of a 4 year combined residency in anatomic pathology and clinical pathology). Thereafter, an additional 1 or 2 years of post-residency education in dermatopathology is undertaken. For trainees with a primary background in Pathology, the fellowship experience includes the equivalent of 6 months of clinical dermatology, and for those whose training is primarily in Dermatology, 6 months of the fellowship are devoted to anatomic pathology. In the United States, dermatopathologists are first certified by the American Boards of Pathology or Dermatology, or the American Osteopathic Boards of Pathology or Dermatology, and they then obtain subspecialty certification (termed "special competence") in dermatopathology by written examination. Since 2003, the International Board of Dermatopathology (IBDP)-- headquartered in Graz, Austria—also has certified candidates from countries around the world. This is done by IBDP review of applicants' professional qualifications, and a formal examination that is given in Europe each year. 
