 For women with diabetes mellitus, pregnancy can present some particular challenges for both mother and child. If the woman who is pregnant has diabetes, it can cause early, and very large babies. Planning in advance is emphasized if one wants to have a baby and has type 1 diabetes mellitus or type 2 diabetes mellitus. Pregnancy management for diabetics needs stringent blood glucose control even in advance of having pregnancy. During a normal pregnancy, many physiological changes occur such as increased hormonal secretions that influence blood glucose levels, such as a glucose-'drain' to the fetus, slowed emptying of the stomach, increased excretion of glucose by the kidneys and resistance of cells to insulin. The risks of maternal diabetes to the developing fetus include Miscarriage, growth restriction, growth acceleration, fetal obesity (macrosomia), mild neurological deficits., polyhydramnios and birth defects. A hyperglycemic maternal environment has also been associated with neonates that are at greater risk for future development of negative health outcomes such as future obesity, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and metabolic syndrome. Mild neurological and cognitive deficits in offspring, including increased symptoms of ADHD, impaired fine and gross motor skills, and impaired explicit memory performance, have been linked to pregestational Type I diabetes and gestational diabetes. Prenatal iron deficiency has been suggested as a possible mechanism for these problems. Birth defects are not currently an identified risk for the child of women with gestational diabetes, since those primarily occur in the latter part of pregnancy, where vital organs already have taken their most essential shape. Still, having diabetes type I or II has a 2-3 fold increase in risk of birth defects. The cause is e.g. oxidative stress, by activating protein kinase C and lead to apoptosis of some cells. High blood sugar is harmful to both the mother and her fetus. Experts advise diabetics to maintain the blood sugar level close to normal range for 2 to 3 months in advance, before planning for pregnancy. Managing blood sugar close to normal before and during pregnancy helps to protect the health of both mother and the baby. Insulin may be needed for type 2 diabetics instead of diabetes medication (oral) or extra insulin may be needed for type 1 diabetics during pregnancy. Doctors' may advise to check blood sugar more often to maintain near normal blood sugar level. If already pregnant, then consult the doctor right away. It’s not too late to bring the blood sugar close to normal so that the mother and the baby stay healthy during the rest of the pregnancy. Diabetes mellitus may be effectively managed by appropriate meal planning, increased physical activity and properly-instituted insulin treatment. Some tips for controlling diabetes in pregnancy include: Breast feeding is good for the child even with a mother with diabetes mellitus. Some women wonder whether breast feeding is recommended after they have been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. Breast feeding is recommended for most babies, including when mothers may be diabetic. In fact, the child’s risk for developing type 2 diabetes mellitus later in life may be lower if the baby was breast-fed. It also helps the child to maintain a healthy body weight in infancy. However, the breastmilk of mothers with diabetes has been demonstrated to have a different composition than that of non-diabetic mothers, containing elevated levels of glucose and insulin and decreased polyunsaturated fatty acids. Although benefits of breast-feeding for the children of diabetic mothers have been documented, ingestion of diabetic breast milk has also been linked to delayed language development on a dose-dependent basis. The White classification, named after Priscilla White who pioneered research on the effect of diabetes types on perinatal outcome, is widely used to assess maternal and fetal risk. It distinguishes between gestational diabetes (type A) and diabetes that existed before pregnancy (pregestational diabetes). These two groups are further subdivided according to their associated risks and management. There are 2 classes of gestational diabetes (diabetes which began during pregnancy): The second group of diabetes which existed before pregnancy can be split up into these classes: An early age of onset or long-standing disease comes with greater risks, hence the first three subtypes. Blood glucose levels in the pregnant woman should be regulated as strictly as possible. In diabetes mellitus type 2, oral antidiabetic drugs should be replaced with insulin. 
