 Radiation dosimetry is the measurement and calculation of the radiation dose in matter and tissue resulting from the exposure to indirect and direct ionizing radiation. It is a scientific subspecialty in the fields of health physics and medical physics that is focused on the calculation of internal (Internal dosimetry) and external doses from ionizing radiation. There are a number of different measures of radiation dose, including absorbed dose (D) measured in grays (Gy), Equivalent dose (H) measured in sieverts (Sv), Effective dose (H) (also measured in sieverts) and Kerma (K) measured in grays, along with dose area product (DAP) and dose length product (DLP). Each measure is often simply described as ‘dose’, which can lead to confusion. Non-SI units are still prevalent as well, where dose is often reported in rads and dose equivalent in rems. By definition, 1 Gy = 100 rad and 1 Sv = 100 rem. In the United States, radiation dosimeters measure and display dose in rems rather than sieverts. One rem = 1 centisievert = 1/100 sievert. The fundamental measure of the biological effect of ionising radiation is the absorbed dose (D), which is defined as the mean energy imparted [by ionising radiation] (dE) per unit mass (dm) of material (D = dE/dm) The SI unit of absorbed dose is the gray (Gy) defined as one joule per kilogram. Absorbed dose, as a point measurement, is suitable for describing localised (i.e. partial organ) exposures such as tumour dose in radiotherapy. It may be used to estimate stochastic risk provided the amount and type of tissue involved is stated. Localised diagnostic dose levels are typically in the 0-50 mGy range. At a dose of 1 milligray (mGy) of photon radiation, each cell nucleus is crossed by an average of 1 liberated electron track. The absorbed dose required to produce a certain biological endpoint varies between different types of radiation, such as photons, neutrons or alpha particles. This is taken into account by the equivalent dose (H), which is defined as the mean dose to organ T by radiation type R (DT,R), multiplied by a weighting factor wR designed to takes into account varying biological effectiveness (RBE) of the radiation type, i.e. for the same absorbed dose in Gy, alpha particles are 20 times as biologically potent as X or gamma rays. Note that the earlier measure of ‘dose equivalent’ is not organ averaged. Equivalent dose is primarily designed for estimation of stochastic risks from radiation exposures. Stochastic effects, which include cancer and hereditary effects are probabilistic in nature, theoretically resulting from mutation to a single cell. As dose is averaged over the whole organ; equivalent dose is rarely suitable for evaluation of acute radiation effects or tumour dose in radiotherapy. In the case of estimation of stochastic effects, assuming a linear dose response, this averaging out should make no difference as the total energy imparted remains the same. It is difficult to compare the stochastic risk from localised exposures of different parts of the body (e.g. a chest x-ray compared to a CT scan of the head), or to compare exposures of the same body part but with different exposure patterns (e.g. a cardiac CT scan with a cardiac nuclear medicine scan). One way to avoid this problem is to simply average out a localised dose over the whole body. The problem of this approach is that the stochastic risk of cancer induction varies from one tissue to another. The effective dose (E) is designed to account for this variation by the application of specific weighting factors for each tissue (WT). Effective dose is defined as the sum of the equivalent dose to each organ (HT) multiplied by its respective tissue weighting factor (wT). Weighting factors are calculated by the International Commission for Radiological Protection (ICRP), based on the risk of cancer induction for each organ and adjusted for associated lethality, quality of life and years of life lost. Organs that are remote from the site of irradiation will only receive a small equivalent dose (mainly due to scattering) and therefore contribute little to the effective dose, even if the weighting factor for that organ is high. Effective dose is used to estimate stochastic risks for typical examinations for a ‘reference’ person. It is not suitable for estimating stochastic risk for individual exposures to individual patients and should never be used to assess acute radiation effects. Radiation dose refers to the amount of energy deposited in matter and/or biological effects of radiation, and should not be confused with the unit of radioactive activity (becquerel, Bq). Exposure to a radioactive source will give a dose which is dependent on the activity, duration of exposure, energy of the radiation emitted, distance from the source and shielding. The equivalent dose is then dependent upon the weighting factors above. Dose is a measure of deposited dose, and therefore can never go down—removal of a radioactive source can only reduce the rate of increase of absorbed dose, never the total absorbed dose. The worldwide average background dose for a human being is about 3.5 mSv per year 1, mostly from cosmic radiation and natural isotopes in the earth. The largest single source of radiation exposure to the general public is naturally-occurring radon gas, which comprises approximately 55% of the annual background dose. It is estimated that radon is responsible for 10% of lung cancers in the United States. There are several ways of measuring doses from ionizing radiation. Workers who come in contact with radioactive substances or may be exposed to radiation routinely carry personal dosimeters. In the United States, these dosimeters usually contain materials that can be used in thermoluminescent dosimetry (TLD) or optically stimulated luminescence (OSL). Outside the United States, the most widely-used type of personal dosimeter is the film badge dosimeter, which uses photographic emulsions that are sensitive to ionizing radiation. The equipment used in radiotherapy (linear particle accelerator in external beam therapy) is routinely calibrated using ionization chambers or the new and more accurate diode technology. Internal dosimetry is used to evaluate the intake of particles inside human being. Because the human body is approximately 70% water and has an overall density close to 1 g/cm3, dose measurement is usually calculated and calibrated as dose to water. National standards laboratories such as the NPL provide calibration factors for ionization chambers and other measurement devices to convert from the instrument's readout to absorbed dose. The standards laboratories operate a Primary Standard, which is normally calibrated by absolute calorimetry, the warming of substances when they absorb energy. A user sends their Secondary Standard to the laboratory, where it is exposed to a known amount of radiation (derived from the Primary Standard) and a factor is issued to convert the instrument's reading to that dose. The user may then use their Secondary Standard to derive calibration factors for other instruments they use, which then become tertiary standards, or field instruments. The NPL in the UK operates a graphite-calorimeter for absolute photon dosimetry. Graphite is used instead of water as its specific heat capacity is one-sixth that of water and therefore the temperature rises in graphite are 6 times more than the equivalent in water and measurements are more accurate. Significant problems exist in insulating the graphite from the laboratory in order to measure the tiny temperature changes. A lethal dose of radiation to a human is approximately 10–20 Gy. This is 10-20 joules per kilogram. A 1 cm3 piece of graphite weighing 2 grams would therefore absorb around 20–40 mJ. With a specific heat capacity of around 700 J·kg−1·K−1, this equates to a temperature rise of just 20 mK. Medical dosimetry is the calculation of absorbed dose and optimization of dose delivery in radiation therapy. It is often performed by a professional medical dosimetrist with specialized training in the field. In order to plan the delivery of radiation therapy, the radiation produced by the sources is usually characterized with percentage depth dose curves and dose profiles measured by medical physicists. Records of legal dosimetry results are usually kept for a set period of time, depending upon the legal requirements of the nation in which they are used. medical radiation exposure monitoring is the practice of collecting dose information from radiology equipment and using the data to help identify opportunities to reduce unnecessary dose in medical situations. 
