 Professor Douglas Anthony Chamberlain, CBE (born 1931) is a British cardiologist who founded the first paramedic unit in Europe, revolutionising pre-hospital clinical care. Chamberlain was born in Cardiff in 1931. His father was a coal merchant. He was not successful during his school years; he would frequently completely fail spelling and writing exercises. His parents sent him to board at Ratcliffe College, an independent school near Leicester. There a school master realised he was very intelligent but had an 'inability to comprehend the written word'; a condition now called dyslexia. The extra help he was then given meant he passed the entrance exam to Queen's College, University of Cambridge to study medicine. Difficulty telling left and right, almost caused him to fail anatomy. A case of mistaken identity meant he passed; the external examiner thought he was the son of a famous surgeon and therefore passed him. He graduated from the university in 1955 with a Bachelor of Arts (BA), that was later promoted to Master of Arts (MA). He then studied at Medical College of St Bartholomew's Hospital, qualifying as a doctor in 1956 as Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MB, BChir). During his pre-registration year, 1957, Chamberlain remained at St Bartholomew's Hospital. He first undertook a six month appointment as house physician then six months as a house surgeon. The disastrous house surgeon rotation, he had been described as "the worst house surgeon [his surgical supervisor] had ever encountered", confirmed his career direction in medicine rather than surgery. On 5 January 1959, as part of national service, he was commissioned into the Royal Army Medical Corps, British Army as a lieutenant. He was given the service number 459368. He was promoted to captain on 5 January 1960. He was transferred from the National Service List, Regular Army to the National Service List, Army Emergency Reserve of Officers on 27 January 1961. This was the end of his active service. He kept the rank of captain and was given seniority from 5 January 1960. On 5 July 1964, he transferred to Class III, Regular Army Reserve of Officers. He worked at the Royal Sussex County Hospital between 1970 and 2004 as a Consultant Cardiologist. Under Chamberlain's orders, in the early 1970s ambulance personal were trained in resuscitation. He edited Cardiac Arrest: The Science and Practice of Resuscitation Medicine, a reference book on advanced life support and resuscitation medicine. It was winner of the 2008 British Medical Association prize in Cardiology. He is Editor Emeritus of Resuscitation, the official journal of the European Resuscitation Council, In the 1988 New Year Honours, Chamberlain was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE). In June 1989, he was appointed Officer of the Order of St. John (OStJ). He is also a Knight of the Order of Saint Gregory the Great. In 2008, Chamberlain was made an honorary Doctor of Science (DSc) by Coventry University "for his work in cardiology and his work to make paramedicine an essential professional service in the National Health Service". 
