 Drugs used during pregnancy can have temporary or permanent effects on the fetus. Any drug that acts during embryonic or fetal development to produce a permanent alteration of form or function is known as a teratogen. Many physicians would prefer not to prescribe drugs for pregnant women due to concerns over teratogenicity. The apprehension is not necessarily data driven, and is a cautionary response to the lack of clinical studies in pregnant women. In some cases, the use of drugs in pregnancy carries benefits that outweigh the risks. For example, high fever is harmful for the fetus in the early months, thus the use of paracetamol (acetaminophen) is generally associated with lower risk than the fever itself. Similarly, diabetes mellitus during pregnancy may need intensive therapy with insulin to prevent complications to mother and baby. Pregnancy and development of fetus progresses through various changes. The period of one week from fertilisation to implantation of the fertilized egg is called the preimplantation period. This is an 'all or none' period, .i.e. an insult can either cause death or complete recovery can occur. The period from the 8th day to the end of 8th week (2nd month) is the period of organogenesis during which the organs are formed in the fetus. This is the most crucial time with regard to 'structural malformations' and concern over teratogenicity of drugs. From the 3rd month week to the end of 9 months is the period of fetal maturation. Intake of drugs during this period may modify the 'function' of the fetal organs rather than causing gross structural malformations in the fetus; for example, aminoglycosides can affect the functioning of the kidneys as well as the hearing mechanism. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has developed a rating system to provide therapeutic guidance based on potential benefits and fetal risks. Drugs have been classified into categories A, B, C, D and X based on this system of classification. Drugs, and some multivitamins, that have demonstrated no fetal risks after controlled studies in humans are classified as Category A, while drugs like thalidomide with proven fetal risks that outweigh all benefits are classified as Category X. Antibacterial agents Cardiovascular drugs Central nervous system drugs Others 
