 Dyscalculia (also called math disability or numlexia) is a specific learning disability involving innate difficulty in learning or comprehending arithmetic. It is akin to dyslexia and includes difficulty in understanding numbers, learning how to manipulate numbers, learning maths facts, and a number of other related symptoms. Math disabilities can also occur as the result of some types of brain injury, in which case the proper term is acalculia, to distinguish it from dyscalculia which is of innate, genetic or developmental origin. Although math learning difficulties do occur in children with low IQs, dyscalculia also affects people from across the whole IQ range, and sufferers often, but not always, also have difficulties with time, measurement, and spatial reasoning. Estimates of the prevalence of dyscalculia range between 3 and 6% of the population. The term dates back to at least 1949. Mental disabilities specific to maths were originally identified in case studies with patients who suffered specific arithmetic disabilities as a result of damage to specific regions of the brain. More commonly, dyscalculia occurs developmentally, as a genetically linked learning disability which affects a person's ability to understand, remember, or manipulate numbers or number facts (e.g., the multiplication tables). The term is often used to refer specifically to the inability to perform arithmetic operations, but it is also defined by some educational professionals and cognitive psychologists such as Stanislas Dehaene and Brian Butterworth as a more fundamental inability to conceptualize numbers as abstract concepts of comparative quantities (a deficit in "number sense"), which these researchers consider to be a foundational skill, upon which other maths abilities build. Dyscalculia comes from Greek and Latin which means: "counting badly". The prefix "dys" comes from Greek and means "badly". "Calculia" comes from the Latin "calculare", which means "to count". The word "calculare" comes from "calculus" (the diminutive of "calx", which means stone), which means "pebble" or one of the counters on an abacus. The earliest symptom of dyscalculia to appear is a deficit in subitizing. Subitizing is the ability to know, from a brief glance and without counting, how many objects there are in a small group. This is an innate ability, present in human infants from birth. Homologous circuits exist in primates, and many other animals have been shown to possess similar ability; obviously, there is survival value in knowing how many predators there are etc. Human infants can typically subitize three objects, and this number grows as the person matures, so that most adults can subitize 5 or more objects. However, children with dyscalculia can subitize fewer objects and even when correct take longer to identify the number than their age-matched peers. Other symptoms include difficulty reading analog clocks, and in extreme cases inability to even simply state which of two numbers is larger. Scientists have yet to understand the causes of dyscalculia. They have been investigating in several domains. Other causes may be: Involvement of the intraparietal sulcus has been suggested. Software intended to remediate dyscalculia has been developed. Forms of educational therapy, such as neuro-sensory educational therapy, can be an effective treatment. A study used transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS) to the parietal lobe during numerical learning and demonstrated selective improvement of numerical abilities that was still present six months later. 
