 Elastic therapeutic tape, is an elastic cotton strip with an acrylic adhesive that is used for treating athletic injuries and a variety of physical disorders. There is little scientific evidence that elastic therapeutic taping produces clinically significant benefits. A 2012 systematic review found that the efficacy of elastic therapeutic tape in pain relief was trivial given that no studies found clinically important results. The tape "may have a small beneficial role in improving strength, range of motion in certain injured cohorts and force sense error compared with other elastic tapes, but further studies are needed to confirm these findings". The product is a type of thin, elastic cotton tape that is claimed to be able to stretch up to 120–140% of its original length. As a result, if the tape is applied to a patient on a stretch greater than its normal length, it will "recoil" after being applied and therefore create a pulling force on the skin or muscle that it is being applied to. This elastic property allows much greater range of motion compared to traditional white athletic tape and can also be left on for long periods of time before reapplication. Designed to mimic human skin, with roughly the same thickness and imitates epidermis’ inherent elastic properties; the tape can be stretched 30-40% of its resting longitudinal length. It is a latex free material with acrylic adhesive, which is heat activated. The cotton fibers allow for evaporation and quicker drying leading to longer wear time, up to 4 days. How the tape affects the body is dependent on its usage throughout the body and how it is applied: the direction of pull, the shape, and the location, all play a role in its hypothetical function. Some of the proposed benefits of elastic therapeutic tape include proprioceptive facilitation, muscle facilitation, reduced muscle fatigue, reduced delayed-onset muscle soreness, pain inhibition, and enhanced healing such as reduced edema, improvement of lymphatic drainage and blood flow. There are several theoretical benefits claimed for the tape. One of those is correcting the alignment of weak muscles as well as facilitating joint motion as a result of the tape's recoiling qualities. Additionally, the tape is claimed to lift the skin, increasing the space below it, and increasing blood flow and circulation of lymphatic fluids (swelling). This increase in the interstitial space is said to lead to less pressure on the body's nociceptors, which detect pain, and to stimulate mechanoreceptors, to improve overall joint proprioception. The tape is applied with the affected muscle in a stretched position, taping from the origin of the muscle to the insertion point. Once applied, it is rubbed to activate the pressure-sensitive adhesive. Application is in three general shapes or techniques. An "I" shape is used for small or linear places, for example an I-shaped piece of tape will be applied to the teres minor or rhomboid minor. A "Y" shape is used for larger muscles, like the deltoid. The "X" shape is used for large and long muscles, such as the biceps femoris. A surge in popularity resulted after the product was donated to Olympic athletes in the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics and 2012 Summer Olympics. 
