 Elmer Ernest Southard (July 28, 1876February 8, 1920) was an American neuropsychiatrist, neuropathologist, professor and author. Born in Boston, Southard lived there for almost his entire life. He attended Boston Latin School, then completed college and medical school at Harvard University. While studying at Harvard, he distinguished himself as a chess player. Southard briefly studied in Germany, then returned to the United States as a pathologist at Danvers State Hospital. He held academic appointments at Harvard University and Harvard Medical School. Southard headed the Boston Psychopathic Hospital after its opening in 1912. There he pioneered the pathologic study of the brain and was particularly interested in the study of shell shock and schizophrenia. He published several books, including Shell Shock and Other Neuropsychiatric Problems, which included nearly one thousand case histories. Southard served as president of the American Medico-Psychological Association and the Boston Society of Psychiatry and Neurology. He held advisory positions with the U.S. Chemical Warfare Service and with the Eugenics Record Office. Southard was also an influential mentor, providing guidance to several well-known figures in psychiatry and psychology. He worked with Myrtelle Canavan early in her career, and he inspired Karl Menninger's interest in psychiatry. Comparative psychologist Robert Yerkes referred to Southard as "my master of psychopathology." He was married to Dr. Mabel Fletcher Austin, a Wellesley College professor, and the couple had three children. Southard died of pneumonia in 1920 while on a trip to New York City to deliver lectures at a medical society meeting. E. E. Southard was born in Boston in 1876 to Martin Southard and Olive Wentworth Knowles. He graduated from Boston Latin School in 1893, earning academic awards in reading and English essay. Southard earned an A.B. from Harvard College in 1897 and a medical degree from Harvard Medical School in 1901. While studying at Harvard, Southard was a noted chess player for the college. In an 1899 newspaper article covering an Ivy League chess tournament, Southard was described as Harvard's chief chess player. The article noted that "it is probable that as long as he is engaged in the tournament, Harvard will win the cup." Shortly after finishing his medical degree, he spent a brief time studying at the Senckenberg Institute at Frankfurt and the University of Heidelberg in Germany. After returning from Germany, Southard interned in pathology at Boston City Hospital. He became an instructor at Harvard Medical School in 1904. From 1906 to 1909, Southard was an assistant pathologist at Danvers State Hospital. He was named assistant professor of psychology at Harvard University and Bullard Professor of Neuropathology at Harvard Medical School in 1909, titles which he held until his death. In that same year, he became pathologist to the Massachusetts Commission on Mental Diseases. He also assumed leadership of the Boston Psychopathic Hospital from 1912 to his death. Southard served in a strategic advisory role with the U.S. Army Chemical Warfare Service during World War I, attaining the rank of major. Southard studied the organic bases of mental illness at a time when two camps of professionals (known informally as the "brain spot men" and the "mind twist men") debated biological and behavioral manifestations of psychiatric disorders. Southard's neuropathological perspective was eclipsed after his death by the growing dominance of "mind twist" or functional perspectives on mental illness promoted by the "dynamic psychiatry" or "psychobiology" of Adolf Meyer and the psychoanalytic perspectives of Sigmund Freud, C.G. Jung and Alfred Adler. Additionally, physiological theories of "autointoxication" were explored in the pre-1940 era of US psychiatry, but Southard had long rejected these. Southard engaged in early studies of the phenomenon of shell shock in the World War I era. In the debate over whether shell shock resulted from physical or emotional causes, Southard found overlap between organic and functional ailments and preferred not to make distinctions between the two. In Shell Shock and Other Neuropsychiatric Problems, he described the term "shell shock" as advantageous because it "compared with the more acutely terrible and life-in-the-balance thing we know as traumatic or surgical shock." Indeed, once the condition was widely known to not result from physical forces, a stigma arose for patients, and arguments over its actual origins stood in the way of effective treatment. Southard was particularly interested in dementia praecox, which he favored renaming schizophrenia. He found diffuse anatomic differences in the brains of schizophrenia patients. These changes would be ignored or dismissed as artifactual by other investigators for several decades. Serious attention to Southard's findings would not reemerge in medical literature until the 1990s, and changes in diagnostic criteria complicate any comparison of Southard's findings to modern schizophrenic patients. Shortly before his death, Southard wrote and presented Non-dementia non-praecox: note on the advantages to mental hygiene of extirpating a term. He did not have the opportunity to see it published. Southard and Mary Jarrett founded the field of psychiatric social work as they worked together to apply psychiatry to industrial employees. The Kingdom of Evils, a book on psychiatric social work co-authored by Southard and Jarrett, was published after his death. In the introduction to the book, Dr. Richard Cabot wrote that the work highlights the collaboration between the doctor and the social worker. The physician excels at diagnosis, Cabot asserts, while the social worker is better able to provide resources for treatment. He was a past president of the American Medico-Psychological Association and was president of the Boston Society of Psychiatry and Neurology upon his death. Other professional memberships included the American Genetic Association, National Epilepsy Association, the American Association of Pathologists, the Massachusetts Medical Society and the Society of Experimental Biology. He served in an editorial capacity for several publications, including the Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. Southard also served on the Board of Scientific Directors for the Eugenics Record Office (ERO). Led by biologist Charles Davenport, the ERO lobbied for state sterilization laws and restrictions on U.S. immigration. Public approval of the office declined in the 1930s when eugenics became closely associated with Nazism, and the ERO closed in 1939. While at Danvers State Hospital, Southard met Myrtelle Canavan, with whom he worked and published in neuropathology for the next several years. In 1912, he arrived at Boston Psychopathic Hospital, where Canavan had also taken a position. In 1914, Canavan received a tempting job offer from the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane. In his capacity with the state mental health commission, Southard petitioned the board to create a position for Canavan as assistant to the pathologist. Canavan's new salary was enough for her to refuse the offer in Pennsylvania. After Southard's death, Canavan examined the brains of Southard and his parents. In 1925, she published Elmer Ernest Southard and His Parents: A Brain Study. In 1931, Myrtelle Canavan identified a neurodegenerative disorder that became known as Canavan disease. Southard also mentored Karl Menninger during Menninger's internship at Boston Psychopathic Hospital. Menninger planned to join his father, general practitioner C. F. Menninger, in medical practice. Southard steered Karl Menninger's interests toward mental health, and the Menninger Foundation was later established with a focus on psychiatry. Karl Menninger later served as president of the American Psychoanalytic Association. The Menninger family opened the Southard School, a teaching facility for mentally ill children, a few years after Southard's death. Southard had considerable influence on the early career of comparative psychologist Robert Yerkes. Yerkes held a half-time appointment at Boston Psychopathic Hospital with Southard from 1913 to 1917. Shortly thereafter, Yerkes was elected to the presidency of the American Psychological Association and developed the U.S. Army's mental testing program during World War I. In his autobiography, Yerkes characterized Southard as "my master of psychopathology." In 1906, Southard married Dr. Mabel Fletcher Austin, a Wellesley College lecturer and the daughter of late Minnesota governor Horace Austin. They had three children: a daughter, Anne, and two sons. Southard's younger son, O. Mabson Southard (born Ordway Southard), became an early writer of English-language haiku and was a Communist Party candidate in the 1942 Alabama gubernatorial race. His older son Austin developed schizophrenia and died by suicide a few years after Southard's death. Southard's life was often characterized by a busy, sleepless pace. L. Vernon Briggs, a colleague at Boston Psychopathic Hospital, said that Southard considered himself to be hypomanic. "He himself said that most people fell within one of the classifications of mental disease, and he felt himself to be of the manic-depressive type. We seldom saw the depressive side of him though it was undoubtedly there; ordinarily he appeared carried away with enthusiasm about his latest interest – and everything worthwhile interested him." Southard was a member of two local chess clubs, and he was described in his New York Times death notice as "one of the foremost amateur chess players in America". He often arrived at his laboratory after spending all night awake playing chess. After his death, in "metaphors more appropriate for a comet than a man", friends spoke of the intellect which allowed Southard to play up to six matches of "blind chess" simultaneously. He was also a member of the Wicht Club, a social and intellectual club of young Harvard academics. Southard died after a brief bout with pneumonia at the Hotel Prince George in New York City on February 8, 1920. He was 43. Southard had traveled to New York the previous week to deliver medical society lectures. In the description of the postmortem analysis of his brain, Canavan wrote that Southard had experienced "singlular difficulties producing considerable mental discomfort" in the last year of his life. She said that he sensed his impending death and felt pressure to complete his unfinished research tasks. Canavan quoted him as saying, "I shall not live long, I must hurry; I must get lots of others busy." 
