 The European Wound Management Association (EWMA) was founded in 1991. The association works to promote the advancement of education and research into native epidemiology, pathology, diagnosis, prevention and management of wounds of all aetiologies. EWMA is an umbrella organisation linking wound management associations across Europe and a multidisciplinary group bringing together individuals and organisations interested in wound management. Currently, the association bridges 46 Cooperating Organisations (national wound care associations in Europe) and, in addition, partners with a considerable number of wound and wound related associations in and outside of Europe. Furthermore, EWMA has a large number of individual members from all over Europe. EWMA works to reach its objectives by being an educational resource, organising conferences, contributing to international projects related to wound management, actively supporting the implementation of existing knowledge within wound management and providing information on all aspects of wound management. The EWMA Journal is the official journal of the European Wound Management Association (EWMA). Issues are published in January, May and October. EWMA Journal is CINAHL indexed and provides peer-reviewed original scientific articles, reviews, clinical information, and information about development in wound healing and management across Europe. The Journal also functions as a communication tool between EWMA, its members and the EWMA Cooperating Organisations. It serves as a means of distributing information and details of initiatives across national borders, thus supporting EWMA’s aim of advancing wound healing within Europe. As EWMA shares the vision of an ‘open access’ philosophy, the Journal is freely available online. It is distributed to EWMA members and to members of national wound healing organisations in Europe, as well as to a wider audience via the internet. As a result, each issue of the EWMA Journal is distributed to 12-13,000 nurses, doctors and other health care professionals who have a special interest in wound care. The EWMA Patient Outcome Group has a clinical scientific platform, including both clinicians and representatives from companies working within wound healing. Discussions and objectives of the group touch upon topics such as structure of treatment as well as more traditional clinical trials and approval and reimbursement of wound care products. Primary objectives of the group are to: 1. Identify barriers: 2. Propose guidelines for clinical data collection: 3. Participate in the public debate / policy making: 4. Create and implement consensus: 
