 The European Society of Gynaecological Oncology (ESGO) is a Europe-wide society of health care professionals and researchers specializing in the study, prevention, treatment and care of gynaecological cancers. The society, which has more than 1,000 members from over 30 European countries, was founded in Venice, Italy, in 1983. ESGO aims to “promote communication with scientific and professional bodies in order to create a dynamic and democratic European platform of individual professionals including specialists, fellows and nurses for networking, sharing of knowledge and improving gynecologic cancer care in Europe.” ESGO’s biennial conference regularly attracts over 1,500 participants, and enables European health care professionals and researchers involved in the field of gynaecological oncology to network, discuss, debate, and disseminate new medical and scientific studies relating to the treatment and care of gynaecological cancer. In addition to its conferences, ESGO organizes a number of educational events, workshops and backed meetings throughout the year and provides travel grants to its members. ESGO is also active in developing educational tools such as videos, DVDs, and webcast lectures for the use of relevant health professionals. The European Network of Gynaecological Oncological Trial Groups (ENGOT), an integral part of ESGO, is active in coordinating and promoting clinical trials on patients suffering from gynaecological cancers all over Europe. In cooperation with the European Board and College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (EBCOG) and on behalf of the European Union of Medical Specialists (UEMS), ESGO provides certification for trained gynaecologic oncologists and also accredits relevant instructional institutions. ESGO’s gynaecological oncology training and accreditation programmes have become recognized standards in a number of European countries. ESGO's peer-reviewed official medical journal, the International Journal of Gynecological Cancer, is published bimonthly and covers research related to gynaecological cancer such as experimental studies, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, diagnostic techniques, pathology epidemiology and surgery. 
