 The European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (formerly the European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology) is an international organisation of national associations and of individual persons, constituted as an association pursuant to Article 60 et seq. of the Swiss Civil Code. The Academy is currently domiciled in Zurich, Switzerland. The European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI) is a non-profit organisation active in the field of allergic and immunologic diseases such as asthma, rhinitis, eczema, occupational allergy, food and drug allergy and anaphylaxis. EAACI was founded in 1956 in Florence, Italy and has become the largest medical association in Europe in the field of allergy and clinical immunology. It includes more than 6,500 individual members from 107 countries, as well as 41 National Allergy Societies. The EAACI Constitution states: The Academy shall be a non-profit organisation in the area of allergology and clinical immunology aimed at: In order to strengthen its influence on the work of the main clinical specialities where allergy and clinical immunology is of importance, the EAACI has formed five sections. These sections co-ordinate and represent the activities of all members and affiliates who have expressed a wish to join the Section and will act as a focus and point of contact for relevant specialty societies and non-members. The sections are: Asthma, Immunology, Dermatology, ENT, and Pediatrics. The EAACI organises its main congress each June. It includes scientific communication of abstracts (posters and oral communications), workshops and symposia. The congress features extensive multi-day scientific programmes, with 7,000-8,000 international participating delegates, providing in-depth understanding and discussion within targeted medical communities on topics such as: The EAACI congresses have been held in the following cities since 2000: 2000 - Lisbon 2001 - Berlin 2002 - Naples 2003 - Paris 2004 - Amsterdam 2005 - Munich 2006 - Vienna 2007 - Gothenburg 2008 - Barcelona 2009 - Warsaw - www.eaaci2009.com 2010 - London - www.eaaci2010.com 2011 - Istanbul - www.eaaci2011.com Planned congresses: 2012 - Geneva - www.eaaci2012.com 2013 - Milan EAACI develops smaller topic-focused meetings providing additional value to its members and specialists in different areas of allergy. Planned meetings: Past meetings: The academy's task forces produce position papers on scientific developments regarding controversial and current allergy-related topics, such as the effects of climate change on respiratory allergic diseases. The academy runs allergy schools to train and educate medical specialists in an interactive social networking environment. Planned Schools: Past Schools: To increase the impact of basic immunology research in the field of allergy, EAACI organises winter schools for young scientists, who are active in allergy research. Planned Winter Schools: Past winter schools: Every year, fellowships are awarded to junior members interested in increasing their knowledge and skills at Europe’s leading scientific institutions. The EAACI/UEMS conduct a knowledge examination in allergology and clinical immunology each year during the EAACI Congress. It does not replace or substitute currently existing national examinations regularly held by national bodies, but is intended to further raise the standard of allergology and clinical immunology in Europe. It is recognised by some countries as the official written part of their board exam. The 5th examination is scheduled to take place 16 June 2012, during the EAACI Congress in Geneva. EAACI congresses and schools provide CME credits to participants. The Academy also works as an umbrella organisation for accreditation of external scientific and educational events. 
