 Evans syndrome is an autoimmune disease in which an individual's antibodies attack their own red blood cells and platelets. Both of these events may occur simultaneously or one may follow on from the other. Its overall pathology resembles a combination of autoimmune hemolytic anemia and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is a condition in which the red blood cells that normally carry oxygen and carbon dioxide are destroyed by an autoimmune process. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura is a condition in which platelets are destroyed by an autoimmune process. Platelets are a component of blood that contribute to the formation of blood clots in the body to prevent bleeding. The syndrome was first described in 1951 by R. S. Evans and colleagues. It has been variously reported that between 10% and 23% of patients who have autoimmune hemolytic anemia, will also have thrombocytopenia and thus Evans syndrome. The two features may occur together or sequentially. Although Evans syndrome seems to be a disorder of immune regulation, the exact pathophysiology is unknown. Autoantibodies targeted at different antigenic determinants on red cells and platelets are assumed to cause isolated episodes of hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia, respectively. The diagnosis is made upon blood tests to confirm not only hemolytic anemia and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, but also a positive direct antiglobulin test (DAT) and an absence of any known underlying etiology. Other antibodies may occur directed against neutrophils and lymphocytes, and "immunopancytopenia" has been suggested as a better term for this syndrome. Initial treatment is with glucocorticoid corticosteroids or intravenous immunoglobulin, a procedure that is also used in ITP cases.  In children, good response to a short steroid course is achieved in approximately 80 percent of cases.  Although the majority of cases initially respond well to treatment, relapses are not uncommon and immunosuppressive drugs (e.g. ciclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil, vincristine and danazol) are subsequently used, or combinations of these. The off-label use of rituximab (trade name Rituxan) has produced some good results in acute and refractory cases, although further relapse may occur within a year.  Splenectomy is effective in some cases, but relapses are not uncommon. The only prospect for a permanent cure is the high-risk option of an allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (SCT). Evan's syndrome is rare, serious, and has a reported mortality rate of 7%. It has been observed that there is a risk of developing other autoimmune problems and hypogammaglobulinemia, with recent research finding that 58% of children with Evans syndrome have CD4-/CD8- T cells which is a strong predictor for having autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. 
