 Floating-Harbor syndrome, also known as Pelletier-Leisti syndrome, is a rare disease with less that 50 cases described in the literature. It is usually diagnosed in early childhood. Although its cause is presently unknown it is thought to be due to a genetic mutation. The disease was first described in 1973 by at the Boston Floating Hospital, and in 1975 at Harbor General Hospital in Torrance, California. The name Floating-Harbor syndrome was coined by Robinson et al. in 1988. All cases of this syndrome have the triad of short stature, expressive language delay and a triangular face with a prominent nose and deep set eyes. The short stature is often apparent at birth and is associated with significantly delayed bone age. Stature may be as much as 4-6 standard deviations below the mean height for age. Expressive language delay occurs despite normal motor development. The facies are triangular with a prominent nose and deep set eyes. Other features that may be present include posteriorly rotated ears, long eyelashes, a bulbous nose, a wide columella, a short philtrum, thin lips, a broad downturned mouth, a short neck and a low posterior hairline. There is a strong association with celiac disease. Joint laxity, curved fifth fingers (clinodactyly) and hirsutism may also be found. Dental anomalies (malocclusion, supernumerary upper teeth) occur. Intellectual functioning may range from borderline low to well below average intellectual disability. Early puberty may occur. Heart defects may be present: the most commonly recognised involves a narrowing of the pulmonary artery (pulmonary stenosis). The urethra may open on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). The clinical diagnosis of Floating–Harbor syndrome may be unreliable or overlap with other dysmorphic syndromes. Differential diagnoses include velocardiofacial syndrome (Shprintzen syndrome), trichorhinophalangeal syndrome, De Lange syndrome, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and monosomy 22q11. The cause of this condition is unknown but a genetic cause is suspected. Two possibly familial cases have been reported—one in a mother and son and the other in a mother and daughter. This suggests an autosomal dominant inheritance but additional cases need to be investigated to establish this. Another report has suggested that the inheritance may be autosomal recessive. 
