 Gabriel Cousens (born Kenneth Gabriel Cousens, 1943) is an American physician M.D., homeopath, and spiritual writer who practices holistic medicine. Cousens advocates live foods therapy, a nutritional regimen which he says can cure diabetes, depression and other chronic degenerative diseases. He is the founder of the "Essene Order of Light", an offshoot of a New Age religion based upon modern interpretations of the Essenes, an ancient Jewish sect, teachings from the Jewish Kabbalah and the Torah, and Hindu beliefs. Essene Order of Light is taught by Cousens at "Tree of Life Foundation", an organization directed by Cousens and headquartered at its "Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center" in Patagonia, Arizona. Cousens has written books and tours internationally promoting his ideas on food and his spiritual beliefs. Cousens grew up in Highland Park, Illinois. When he was nine he experienced visions of "white robed ancients", whom he later identified as members of the White Brotherhood, who were the Essene Elders or Order of Melchizedek. He graduated from Amherst College in 1965 with a B.A. in biology, where he was a football lineman (guard). The team was undefeated in 1964, and that year he received a National Football Foundation National Scholar-Athlete Award. He earned his medical degree from Columbia Medical School in 1969, and he completed his residency in psychiatry in 1973. Describing his earlier diet, he said that he "wolfed down burgers and fries" in college. He never met a vegetarian until he was 27, and he switched to the diet three years later. After adopting the diet, he began teaching meditation and studying the Essene Way, with a focus on the Kabbalah, yoga, and kundalini. In 1974 he went to India to study with Swami Muktananda, ending up staying for seven years. After experiencing a Kundalini awakening in 1975, Cousens sought the ideal diet to support his spiritual experience and nurture spiritual growth, concluding that a live-food diet would do so. He returned to the United States in 1981 and returned to the study of the Essene Way, becoming ordained in 1988; he also became a Reiki master. Among consumers and supporters of alternative medicine, Cousens acquired a reputation as an expert in spirituality, fasting, and raw food nutrition, both in the United States and abroad. Cousens founded the Essene Order of Light in 1992, and the following year he established the Tree of Life Foundation as a federal tax-exempt religious organization operating out of the Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center in Patagonia, Arizona. The healing modalities offered at the center include fasting and detoxification, nutrition, raw food education, a natural approach to treating diabetes called conscious eating program. Cousens is an ordained Rabbi and offers workshops on spiritual Judaism. His newest book, Torah as a Guide to Enlightenment, published through North Atlantic Books, is a commentary on the Torah from a Kabbalistic perspective. Cousens founded a not for profit organization called the Essene Order of Light which teaches "modern Essene living". He outlined his philosophy in his book Creating peace by being peace. Cousens has advocated a nutritionally based raw food diet for babies and children. He instituted a study of the medical history of infants and children and advocates for raw food education. Many mainstream practitioners are critical of an all raw food diet. Robert Kemp, professor of pediatrics at the SUNY Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, called the diet a "precursor to developmental delay and a lifelong learning deficit", saying that children were likely to suffer iron deficiency and protein malnutrition if fed the diet at weaning. Joel Fuhrman, nutritional specialist and author who advocates more raw food consumption, said that an all-raw food diet could lead to vitamin and caloric deficiencies in children. A 2005 study in Archives of Internal Medicine found no major deficiencies in the bone health of adults on raw diets. While the raw food group had lower weights and bone mass, they had normal vitamin D levels. In 1998, 57-year-old Charles Levy of New Jersey died after being treated at the center over a five-day period. The cause of death was determined by the Santa Cruz County Medical Examiner, who along with the Arizona Osteopathic Medical Board attributed the death to a gas gangrene infection caused by "bovine adrenal fluid" injections given by Cousens as part of a treatment for fatigue. The autopsy also found that Levy had hepatitis, encephalomyelitis, and coronary atherosclerosis. Levy's son said that his father was healthy, able to run three miles, not overweight, and had no high blood pressure at the time of his visit to the spa, and the family sued for malpractice. Cousens settled the suit for an undisclosed amount paid to the family. The case came up before the Arizona Board of Homeopathic Medical Examiners in 2001. Despite the medical examiner's report and testimony, then Board Chairman Dr. Bruce Shelton said he "found no medical fault with Dr. Cousens' care of" Levy and the board found "no violation of homeopathic law" in Cousens' treatment. Cousens argued that the medical examiner had misdiagnosed the cause of death, which he said was toxic shock unrelated to the injections, a claim that the Levy family attorney called "outrageous". A 2009 documentary, Simply Raw, followed six people with diabetes who go through a thirty-day program at the Tree of Life Rejuvenation Center in an attempt to cure their disease with a raw food diet and without drugs. 
