 The Government medical college (GMC) & Hospital (GMCH), Aurangabad () is a medical school affiliated to the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (MUHS), Nashik. The College is recognized by the Medical Council of India (MCI), New Delhi for medical education in India. Founded in 1956 it is one of the premier medical institutions in the state of Maharashtra. At present, the college accepts 150 students per year for the undergraduate course MBBS and around 84 students per year for the various postgraduate courses. The College has as excellent training center for young medical doctors, nurses, and DMLT students in the art & science of medicine. The college is located on the east bank of Kham river in northwest part of Aurangabad city, very close to famous tourist attractions like Panchakki and Bibi Ka Maqbara and Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University. The college is 4 km away from the Aurangabad Railway Station, 1.5 km away from the central bus stand and 11 km away from the Chikkalthana Airport. The College has been providing medicinal services to the people of Marathwada region and surrounding districts of Vidarbha and Khandesh regions round the clock for the last 53 years. The hospital of the college started with 300 beds in a small Nizam Bungalow in 1960 is presently equipped with 1170 beds distributed across various departments and wards . The courses offered by the institute are: The graduates from the institute are highly placed & are catering medical services in various fields in India & abroad. The GMC, Auragbad accepts 150 student every year for MBBS course. Out of this 150 seats 15% seats are reserved for All India quota to be filled through all India level medical entrance examination, while remaining seats are filled through Maharashtra state level entrance examination (MH-CET) conducted by Directorate of Medical Education and Research, Maharashtra. 50% of all seats in the college are reserved for students from backward classes. The admission to college is based on merit in above mentioned entrance examinations. The post-graduate students in various courses of medicine and surgery get admitted to GMC through all India and Maharashtra state level post-graduate medical entrance examinations. The special facilities available at Government medical college Hospital (GMCH) are Intensive Care Unit (ICU), Intensive Coronary Care Unit (ICCU), Medicine Intensive Care Uints (MICU), Neonatal Intensive Critical Unit (NICU), Paediatric Intensive care Unit (PICU), CT - SCAN, MRI and a blood bank amongst other facilities. It is backed up by Central & Departmental Laboratories for all the Investigations round the clock. To provide a quality healthcare for people in rural area, the Preventive and Social Medicine (PSM) department of GMC operates one rural health and training centre at Paithan 50 km from Aurangabad. The PSM department also operates one urban healthcare centre in Shahganj area of Aurangabad. The super-specality care centres at GMCH include, Both non-clinical and clinical departments of the GMCH are involved in active research in number of fields. Faculty and students of the GMCH have their research papers published in number of national and international journals. Sandfly fever, an aroboviral disease is known to occur in the arid regions of West Pakistan and Middle East. Its occurrence in India was thought to be doubtful. However, in 1967, the sandfly fever virus was isolated in Aurangabad from febrile cases. The GMC provides residential facility for all its faculty members, staff and students inside the campus. There are two hostels for men undergraduate students (Old and New Boys Hostel), a single hostel for women undergraduate students and a separate hostel for Nursing students. Post-graduate students have a separate residential block. The quarters for nursing and other staff are also located inside the campus. College & hospital buildings: The GMCH is spread over 25 hectare (62 acres) of land. The main administrative and teaching building of college is a four story tall building; build in colonial style with red stones, stone pillars and broad doorways. The main building contains various offices on ground floor, Dean's office on first floor, number of lecture theaters, anatomy museum, pathology museum, PSM museum, canteen and an auditorium with seating capacity of 800. The other buildings in campus include Out Patient Block (OPD), Surgical and OBGY wards block, Medicine wards and Super-Speciality (Cardiology & CVTS) unit. Government Dental College which offers BDS degree is also located in same premises. Library and Reading rooms: The College has a library with good collection of medical text books, national and international journals of different faculties and various other referral books. The two separate reading rooms are available for undergraduate and post graduate students. Gymkhana: The College maintains a gymkhana to provide facilities for sports and recreation for students and faculty members inside the campus. The gymkhana includes table tennis court, badminton court and volley ball court. 
