 Doctor Gregg Feinerman is a top LASIK surgeon practicing in Newport Beach, California. He is a board-certified ophthalmologist who was fellowship-trained at Canada's Gimbel Eye Centre, founded by Dr. Howard V. Gimbel in 1964. At that renowned institution, Dr. Feinerman was able to gain experience with many different refractive surgical procedures. LASIK is a quick, 15-minute procedure that uses lasers to correct common vision problems, such as: nearsightedness, farsightedness, astigmatism, and age-related vision loss called presbyopia. Dr. Feinerman also treats cataracts. Crystalens, the latest FDA-approved intraocular lens (IOL) for cataract treatment, is specially designed to improve vision loss caused by cataracts, but can also correct presbyopia. Shortly after FDA approval in 2003, Dr. Feinerman performed the first Crystalens surgery in Southern California. Since then, he has performed the most Crystalens surgeries in the entire state of California. His practice, Feinerman Vision Center, was established in 2001 and is now recognized as one of the nation’s foremost medical practices dedicated to vision correction. Doctor Feinerman attended George Washington University School of Medicine graduating in 1994. He completed his ophthalmology residency at the University of California, Irvine in 1998. Then he completed a fellowship at in refractive surgery at Gimbel Eye Center. Although he is recognized as a LASIK expert, that is only one of Dr. Feinerman’s many accomplishments. He is board certified as an ophthalmologist by the American Board of Surgeons, and has served as Chairman of Ophthalmology at Hoag Memorial Presbyterian—a magnet hospital that is one of the finest in the country. Since 2005, Dr. Feinerman has also been a member of the Inaugural Eyeonics Advisory Board. In 2010, Bausch & Lomb presented him the Crystalens Millennium Society Inductee Award in recognition of over 1,000 successful Crystalens implants. In 2012, Bausch & Lomb recognized Dr. Feinerman as one of the top ten surgeons implanting crystalens in the U.S. He was also the first surgeon in Southern California to perform it after it was FDA approved in October 2003, and has done more Crystalens procedures than any other California doctor. Even with these accolades, he is not content to be just another LASIK doctor. In addition to his practice, Dr. Feinerman has served as a clinical instructor for Alcon and Bausch & Lomb. He also participates in FDA clinical trials for the latest, cutting-edge technology being developed for vision correction. His interest in finding the best surgical techniques and equipment for his patients is shown by his certifications in: Crystalens IOL Vision Enhancement System; Visian & Verisyese Implantable Contact Lens (ICL); and Blade-free All-laser LASIK with the Ziemer FEMTO LDV (Z-LASIK). For this LASIK surgeon Orange County is home, but Dr. Feinerman is also a familiar face throughout the nation. His surgeries and vision correction procedures have recently been featured on CBS’s daytime show, “The Doctors.” He has also been appeared locally on KTLA’s “Cyber Guy” as well as on other programs such as: KNBC News, KTLA News, and other medical TV programs in the Los Angeles and Orange County areas. In spite of his success and his busy work schedule, Dr. Feinerman believes in giving back to society as well as promoting wellness and philanthropy. In March 2012, he participated in an international humanitarian mission initiated by the Solomon Society to help distribute medical supplies to underserved Jewish communities in Cuba. As a LASIK surgeon, Newport Beach is the ideal place to set up a practice, but Dr. Feinerman is also aware that there are many people in need of eye care who don’t have the resources that most of his clients do. With this in mind, he founded Operation Insight, a non-profit organization that serves people in need of eye care and eye surgery both locally and internationally. In Dr. Feinerman’s words, the organization, “offers free eye surgeries to individuals who cannot afford vision-correction surgery or public servants for whom excellent vision is requisite,” helping many who cannot wear contacts get vision correction. Crystalens are implants which improve eyesight by replacing the natural human lens for people who have cataracts and age-related vision loss called presbyopia. The device acts like the normal human lens to improve both near and far vision. Crystalens is an artificial lens that is implanted in the eye. Its unique technology allows it to have hinges that move back and forth, so the eyes can adjust to clearly focus on objects near or far away. In this way, it can restore some of the eye's natural vision function. The refractive lensectomy procedure that is used to implant the lenses is simple and allows for fast healing. Most patients are ready to resume their normal activities shortly after the procedure. LASIK is one of the most popular refractive procedures used for vision correction. Many nearsighted people's corneas are shaped so that the light coming through the front of the eye converges in front of where it is supposed to, producing a blurred image. For farsighted people, it is the opposite and the light converges behind the eye. During LASIK, a laser is used to make accurate incisions in the eye's cornea and reshapes it, allowing light to come through and accurately project an image on the back of the eye. When this happens, the result is a clear image. LASIK is one of the safest and most popular vision correction procedures performed in the U.S. Most people can see clearly the day after the procedure. 
