 Hans Alfred Nieper (1928–1998) was a well-known controversial German orthomolecular physician. He is best known for his treatments of cancer and multiple sclerosis, although his foundational work with substances that he believed would increase the availability of minerals to the body, what he called "mineral transporters", has also been utilized in treating such conditions as alcoholism and liver damage, among others. Born in Germany in 1928, Nieper was educated at Johann Gutenberg University and the University of Freiberg before earning his medical degree at the University of Hamburg. During his career, he served as director for the Department of Medicine at Silbersee Hospital in Hanover and for the German Society for Medical Tumour Treatment. According to Bryan Rosner, et al., in 2007's The Top 10 Lyme Disease Treatments, Nieper "was known for his expertise in applying the advanced principles of physics to medical concepts." He was among the first researchers to work with lithium orotate, which he believed could significantly reduce the recurrence of cancer. Nieper also patented, along with Franz Kohler, Calcium 2-aminoethylphosphate (Calcium AEP), which he believed could be helpful in combating such diseases as juvenile diabetes, gastritis, ulcer, thyroiditis, Myocarditis and Hodgkin's Disease. However, there is no evidence from reputable clinical trials for the success of the "Nieper Regime" for treating multiple sclerosis utilizing Calcium AEP. The "Nieper Therapy" approach to cancer also uses Calcium AEP, along with selenium. It is based in part around Nieper's observation that cancer is rarer among sharks than other fish and his theory that the lower blood-sodium level of sharks may be the reason; it places among its primary goals the reduction of that sodium in cancer patients. Although Nieper was a controversial figure, 2008's Cancer: The Complete Recovery Guide indicates that he "achieved a great reputation as a natural healer." Nieper advocated the health benefits of beta-carotene, recommending raw cabbage and carrot juice for cancer patients. Coast to Coast AM had a guest on November 20th 2010 report that Nieper was poisoned. 
