 Harvard Medical School (HMS) is the graduate medical school of Harvard University. It is located in the Longwood Medical Area of the Mission Hill neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts. HMS is home (as of Fall 2012) to 705 students in the M.D. program, 147 in the D.M.D. program, 556 in the Ph.D. program, and 155 in the M.D.‑Ph.D program. A typical entering class at Harvard Medical School consists of 165 MD students and 35 DMD students. Upon matriculation, the class of 200 students are divided into five societies named after famous alumni. The majority of first-year students reside in Vanderbilt Hall, across the street from the medical school. Harvard Medical School's M.D.-Ph.D. program allows a student to receive an M.D. from HMS and a Ph.D. from either Harvard or the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (see Medical Scientist Training Program). Prospective students apply to one of two tracks to the M.D. degree. New Pathway, the larger of the two programs, emphasizes problem-based learning. HST, operated by the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, emphasizes medical research. The school has a large and distinguished faculty to support its missions of education, research, and clinical care. These faculty hold appointments in the basic science departments on the HMS Quadrangle, and in the clinical departments located in multiple Harvard-affiliated hospitals and institutions in Boston. There are approximately 2,900 full- and part-time voting faculty members consisting of assistant, associate, and full professors, and over 5,000 full or part-time, non-voting instructors. The current dean of the medical school is Jeffrey S. Flier, an endocrinologist and the former Chief Academic Officer of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, who succeeded neurologist Joseph B. Martin, M.D., Ph.D on September 1, 2007. Sanjiv Chopra, M.B.B.S., M.A.C.P. is the Faculty Dean for the Continuing Education Department. The school is the third-oldest medical school in the United States (after Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons) and was founded by John Warren on September 19, 1782, with Benjamin Waterhouse, and Aaron Dexter. The first lectures were given in the basement of Harvard Hall and then in Holden Chapel. The first class, composed of two students, graduated in 1788. It moved from Cambridge to 49 Marlborough Street in Boston in 1810. From 1816 to 1846, the school, known as Massachusetts Medical College of Harvard University, was located on Mason Street. In 1847 the school relocated to North Grove Street, and then to Copley Square in 1883. The medical school moved to its current location on Longwood Avenue in 1906, where the "Great White Quadrangle" or HMS Quad with its five white marble buildings was established. The architect for the campus was the Boston firm of Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge. The three major flagship teaching hospitals of Harvard Medical School are Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital. Every winter, second year students at HMS write, direct, and perform a full-length musical parody of Harvard, their professors, and themselves. The year 2007 was the centennial performance as the Class of 2009 presented "Joseph Martin and the Amazing Technicolor White Coat" to sellout crowds at Roxbury Community College on February 22, 23, and 24. Upon matriculation, medical students at Harvard Medical School are divided into five societies named after famous alumni. Each society has a master along with several associate society masters who serve as academic advisors to students. In the New Pathway program, students work in small group tutorials and lab sessions within their societies. Every year, the five societies compete in "Society Olympics" for the famed "Pink Flamingo" trophy in a series of events (e.g., dance-off, dodgeball, limbo contest) that test the unorthodox talents of the students in each society. The most recent champions are London (Class of 2015), London (Class of 2014) and Cannon (Class of 2013). London (HST) has won the competition most frequently. Harvard Medical School (HMS) has a medical-consulting arm, Partners Harvard Medical International (PHMI). PHMI has long-standing collaborative relationships with medical faculties at Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich, Germany, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia and the Lebanese American University (LAU) in Beirut, Lebanon. Other long-standing relationships include PHMI’s work with Asan Medical Center in Seoul, South Korea, and Tokyo Medical and Dental University in Japan. In 2007 PHMI began a 10‑year collaboration with Lebanese American University (LAU); in October 2009 LAU opened a new medical school with assistance from PHMI. 
