 HealthTeacher is a health curriculum for K-12 teachers at the elementary school, middle school and high school levels. It is considered useful by teachers regardless of whether they have received professional preparation as health educators. HealthTeacher targets teachers in a classroom setting, although people involved in home schooling, community-based health and mental health centers, and other health education venues have also found it helpful. The curriculum was created in 1999 and launched January 20, 2000. The HealthTeacher curriculum delineates knowledge and skill expectations that are consistent with the Assessment Framework and National Health Education Standards for each grade level. It can stand alone as a school's only health curriculum, or it can support an existing curriculum as an adjunct. HealthTeacher addresses the top six health risk behaviors identified by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): A number of psychological, developmental and learning theories and models formed the development of the HealthTeacher curriculum, especially: Health teacher's lessons also make use of a variety of instructional approaches including role plays, cooperative learning activities, independent work, and classroom demonstrations. Originators of the idea to place a comprehensive K-12 health education curriculum for teachers based on national standards on the Internet presented the idea to leaders in the health education community who were receptive to the idea and suggested consultants experienced in developing exemplary health education curricula. The developers established an Advisory Board to advise the project's development and implementation and hired a publishing firm experienced in developing health education materials to lead in writing the curriculum. Focus groups of teachers reviewed and commented on the developing lesson plans. The Advisory Board guided the development of the project so it would meet the needs of health educators, students, and administrators. The board has provided the broad vision for using this web-site to build health literacy for teachers. Members of the initial National Advisory Board were: 
