 Health Advocate, Inc. is a national health advocacy, patient advocacy and assistance company, serving more than 9,000 clients and 40+ million people and offering a spectrum of services to help employers, employees and consumers navigate the healthcare system and facilitate members’ interactions with insurers and providers. The privately held company was founded in 2001 by former Aetna executives and is headquartered in Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania. The company employs registered nurses, medical directors and benefits specialists who address a range of health care and health insurance issues. Personal Health Advocates work one-on-one with members to help them navigate the complicated world of health insurance and medical care. For example, Personal Health Advocates can help members locate providers, address errors on medical bills, answer questions about coverage denials and assist with insurance appeals. The company's complementary solutions include Wellness Advocate, Benefits Gateway+Health Information Dashboards, EAP and Worklife, Pricing Decision Support, Personalized Health Communications, Chronic Care Management, and HR solutions. The company also offers a direct-to-consumer advocacy service, called Health Proponent to individuals who are not part of groups. CORE ADVOCACY For example: Helping members understand tests, treatments, and medications recommended or prescribed by physicians, facilitating the transfer of medical records, X-rays, and lab results before a scheduled appointment with a new physician, arranging for home-care equipment after discharge from a hospital, facilitating review of test results with another physician for confirmation of diagnosis, consolidating a multiple-day testing schedule for members with special needs, arranging hospice and other services for the terminally ill, facilitating transfer from a community hospital to a tertiary care facility. For example: Researching a member’s outstanding out-of-pocket responsibilities and resolving errors with providers and/or the member’s health plan, correcting balance-billing problems, correcting charges incorrectly applied to the member’s deductible, resolving eligibility problems and benefit and claim denials, coordinating benefits between dental, medical, worker’s compensation, and disability carriers, assuring correct application of provider network status, correcting errors in processing of “blind” network provider discounts, resolving coordination-of-benefits disputes between carriers, satisfying plan requests for copies of referrals, providing correct member insurance information to providers. COMPLEMENTARY SOLUTIONS Employers generally offer the service to their employees as an added benefit and extension to their healthcare insurance plans. The employee’s immediate family is also covered. This includes spouses, dependent children, parents and parents-in-law. According to one client, Wawa Food Market's director of compensation and benefits, "As an employer there's a limit to what we can do for our employees. For us it made sense to have this service available, where our associates can reach out to somebody who knows the ins and outs of the health-care business." The company's services are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Those whose employers do not offer the service can purchase it from Health Advocate's direct-to-consumer arm Health Proponent. 
