 The Health Metrics Network (HMN) is a global partnership that facilitates better health information at country, regional and global levels. The Network was formally launched in May 2005 during the 58th session of the World Health Assembly (WHA). Hosted by the World Health Organization (WHO) in Geneva, Switzerland, HMN aims to increase the availability and use of timely and accurate health information by catalysing the joint funding and development of core country health information systems. HMN aims to improve health and save lives through stronger, locally-owned health information systems. HMN has a single strategic goal: increasing the availability and use of timely and accurate health information by catalyzing the development of core country health information systems. In pursuit of this goal, HMN lays out a vision and identifies strategies for health information system (HIS) development. HMN supports this goal through partnership, advocacy, resource mobilization, catalytic country implementation support. HMN also promotes the generation of new knowledge and global public goods through research, technical innovation, and sharing lessons learned. Specifically, HMN pursues interrelated objectives as below: HMN has an organizational structure composed of an Executive Board and a Secretariat. The HMN Executive Board is the highest coordinating and decision-making body for the Network. Board membership comprises key stakeholders in health information, including health and statistical experts, developing countries, technical and development partners and funding agencies. The Board’s primary functions relate to strategy and accountability for HMN. It approves the strategic vision, direction and policies of HMN. The HMN Secretariat supports HMN partners to achieve HMN's goal and objectives. The Secretariat consists of an Executive Secretary and core technical and administrative staff. These staff are based at the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland. In Belize, the percentage of HIV+ pregnant women receiving full prevention of mother to child transmission (PMTCT) went from just under 60% in 2006 to virtually 100% in the first half of 2008. Thanks to information system driven improvements, including a national electronic medical record system, HIV+ pregnant women are now readily identified and are closely followed with medical and psychosocial support. This has contributed to the virtual elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV in the country. HMN works with and through partners, including countries, donors, development agencies and technical experts. By linking with other networks and partnerships involved in health information, such as RHINO and PARIS21, HMN extends its reach and both draws upon and contributes to such initiatives. By forging alliances with major consumers of health information, in particular global health initiatives such as The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization and the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, HMN ensures that countries and programmes benefit from coherent and consistent technical support. HMN has benefited from an initial grant of US$ 50 million awarded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in 2004 and additional contributions from other donors including: Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), European Commission, Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Paris 21, Rockefeller Foundation, Systems Research Institute of Thailand, United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID), United States Agency for International Development (USAID), United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and World Bank. 
