 Health equity (related, slightly more neutral terms include healthcare inequality and healthcare disparities) refers to the study of differences in the quality of health and health care across different populations. This may include differences in the "presence of disease, health outcomes, or access to health care" across racial, ethnic, sexual orientation and socioeconomic groups. The term "disparities" generally refers to differences of which the writer disapproves; thus, for instance, some definitions of "disparities" do not include differences due to differing access (e.g., due to socioeconomic class). Health equity can be defined as follows: - Horizontal equity: The equal treatment of individuals or groups in the same circumstances. - Vertical equity: The principle that individuals who are unequal should be treated differently according to their level of need. Differences between populations in the presence of disease and health outcomes are well-documented in many areas. In the United States, disparities are well documented in minority populations such as African Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans, and Latinos, with these groups having higher incidence of chronic diseases, higher mortality, and poorer overall health outcomes. For example, the cancer incidence rate among African Americans is 10% higher than among whites, and adult African Americans and Latinos have approximately twice the risk as whites of developing diabetes. Similarly, differences in the overall level of health in individuals also exist between differing social classes, with lower-status socioeconomic groups generally having poorer health and higher rates of chronic illness including obesity, diabetes, and hypertension; whether these are considered disparities to be eliminated depends on the author. Health equity by some definitions also includes differences in access to health care between populations. For example, those in lower-status socioeconomic groups receive less consistent primary care, which is positively correlated to overall level of health in the recipient. Similarly, in England, "people living in deprived areas were found to receive around 70% less provision relative to need compared with the most affluent areas for both knee and hip replacements." A lack of health equity is also evident in the developing world, where the importance of equitable access to healthcare has been cited as crucial to achieving many of the Millennium Development Goals. "As the populations of the developed countries are aging and coming to require ever more medical attention, they are sucking away local health talent from developing countries" See Ethnicity and health and Race and health. The United States historically had large disparities in health and access to adequate healthcare between races, and current evidence supports the notion that these racially-centered disparities continue to exist and are a significant social health issue. The disparities in access to adequate healthcare include differences in the quality of care based on race and overall insurance coverage based on race. The Journal of the American Medical Association identifies race as a significant determinant in the level of quality of care, with ethnic minority groups receiving less intensive and lower quality care. Ethnic minorities receive less preventative care, are seen less by specialists, and have fewer expensive and technical procedures than non-ethnic minorities. There are also considerable racial disparities in access to insurance coverage, with ethnic minorities generally having less insurance coverage than non-ethnic minorities. For example, Hispanic Americans tend to have less insurance coverage than white Americans and receive less regular medical care. The level of insurance coverage is directly correlated with the level of access to healthcare including preventative and ambulatory care. A 20110 study on racial and ethnic disparities in health done by the Institute of Medicine showed that these differences cannot be accounted for in terms of certain demographic characteristic like insurance status, household income, education, age, geographic location and severity of conditions is comparable. Even when the researchers corrected for these factors, the disparities persist. It is pretty widely recognized that minority groups generally have higher death rates from cancer, heart disease and diabetes than whites. Gerard Boe’s article cites studies that show major disparities in health care as it relates to specific diseases: His article also discusses the increased incidence of receiving little or no routine and usual care and therefore, reduced chance of receiving preventative care and other health services. Racial and Ethnic disparities in children: 31.4 million Children in the United States are of non-white race or ethnicity (March 2010), this compromises 43% of American children and shows an increase over 11% since 2000. Mortality rates are substantially higher in minority children for all-cause mortality. Overall mortality rates are consistently found to be significantly higher in African American and other minority children. Specifically, disparities are found in specific mortality rates for certain diseases, acute-lymphoblastic leukemia and congenital heart defect among others. Asthma has also been a topic of many studies. Race is considered to be more strongly associated with higher rates of African American children with unmet health care needs and lower access to primary health care providers than income is. One of the most important ways to help reduce health disparities is to work to reduce language barriers between patients and physicians. Language barriers are a major problem because of five main difficulties: If physicians and other clinicians are able to reduce language barriers the resulting improved communication can improve compliance, reduce the number of emergency room visits, and enhance patient understanding. Gunderman suggests that there are a few ways for physicians and the health care system in general to reduce language barriers like using nonverbal communication through gestures, the use of visual aids, and printed materials and videos in patients' native languages. They can also improve their fluency in the non-English equivalents of basic medical terms. The use of trained interpreters can also prove extremely valuable. There is debate about what causes health disparities between ethnic and racial groups. However, it is generally accepted that disparities can result from three main areas: The Institute of Medicine report, Race, Ethnicity, and Language Data1 identifies current models for collecting and coding race, ethnicity, and language data; ascertains the challenges involved in obtaining these data in health care settings; and makes recommendations for improvement. A study of 20,000 cancer patients in the United States found that African Americans are less likely than European Americans to survive breast cancer, prostate cancer and ovarian cancer even when given equal care, but that other forms of cancer had equal survival chances, which suggests that biological factors may be at work. The National Partnership for Action to End Health Disparities (NPA) was established to mobilize a nationwide, comprehensive, community-driven, and sustained approach to combating health disparities and to move the nation toward achieving health equity. The mission of the NPA is to increase the effectiveness of programs that target the elimination of health disparities through the coordination of partners, leaders, and stakeholders committed to action. http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/npa/ The National Stakeholder Strategy (NSS)for Achieving Health Equity is a product of the NPA. This document provides a common set of goals and objectives for public and private sector initiatives and partnerships to help racial and ethnic minorities—and other underserved groups—reach their full health potential. The strategy incorporates ideas, suggestions and comments from thousands of individuals and organizations across the country. Local groups can use the National Stakeholder Strategy to identify which goals are most important for their communities and adopt the most effective strategies and action steps to help reach them. http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/npa/templates/content.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid;=33&ID;=286 See also LGBT issues in medicine. Often under emphasized are the minority groups that are heavily affected by health disparities in America, UK and all the same worldwide. Health disparities are not just based on race, ethnic, and cultural differences. Such disparities are seen as affecting the sexuality minority groups and observations and surveys show that one’s sexual minority status may limit access to health care, with especially bad impact on lesbians, who are being discriminated both as females and as homosexual. The homosexual, bisexual, and transgender population continuously experiences a wide range of health and mental health problems related to their sexuality and gender identity. The ongoing discrimination and reduced access to medical care, social and cultural experiences often worsens these problems. Medical professionals and all global citizens are strongly encouraged to treat each patient, consumer and individual equally while being aware of the ideal language, practices and comments to be employed, no matter the sexual orientation. Small changes in the lifestyles of heterosexuals and adjustments in what is considered to be a social norm can decrease the risks of mental health problems within homosexual, bisexual and transgender individuals and therefore develop social equality. “Health inequalities exist for lesbian and bisexual women, largely related to experiences of discrimination, homophobia and heterosexism.” This known interference with health care access is a prime example of heterosexual privilege and homosexual prejudice prevalence in Western societies. Just as this lack of health care affects minority races, ethnic groups, and less represented cultural beliefs; lesbian and bisexual women are deteriorating their health by either not seeing (being feared of) or not be attended to by health care professionals. It is important that health care professionals consider the nine cultural competency techniques suggested by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and make an effort to break the barriers put into place through society’s homophobia and heterosexism. "We don't have a good understanding of the developmental processes that affect LGBT persons. I would love to see something that pulls together what we have attempted to piece together: the LGBT life cycle," -Brian de Vries, gerontologist at San Francisco State University. Most of the current research that exists focuses on homosexual male adults in regards to HIV. There is very little research regarding the entire group of individuals who are categorized under the LGBT umbrella. A ground breaking report sponsored by the University of Minnesota’s Program in Human Sexuality looked into existing literature regarding findings on health issues for LGBT individuals. The report focused on HIV as well as other health issues, including lesbian, bisexual, and transgender individuals. The report listed many key findings: Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Health Access Project: The Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Health Access Project was established in 1997 and first funded by Massachusetts Department of public health. The program developed standards of practice for quality health care services. It also developed a training curriculum for health care providers. Mission: "To strengthen the Massachusetts Department of Public Health's ability to foster the development of comprehensive, culturally appropriate health promotion policies and health care services for GLBT people through a variety of venues including community awareness, policy development, advocacy, and prevention strategies." Vision: "To create a partnership between the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, community-based health and human services agencies, and the GLBT communities and their straight allies to develop an awareness of health issues; reduce barriers to health care and prevention services; and promote, enhance, and sustain health norms for GLBT people throughout the Commonwealth of Massachusetts." One of their major goals is the identify, quantify and close gaps in services as well as barriers to care for GLBT people. www.glbthealth.org/about.html The results in comparing inequities in access to adequate healthcare and gender show that women in the United States generally have higher levels of access to care. These disparities can be explained in part by looking at rates of overall insurance coverage (privatized and publicly assisted) between men and women, the effects of certain socioeconomic factors on levels of coverage between men and women, and overall gender-based differences in perceptions of health and health care. In the United States, women have better access to healthcare, in part, because they have higher rates of health insurance. In one study of a population group in Harlem, 86% of women reported having health insurance (privatized or publicly assisted), while only 74% of men reported having any health insurance. This trend in women reporting higher rates of insurance coverage is not unique to this population and is representative of the general population of the US. Gender-based perceptions of health and healthcare may help explain some of the lag of men behind women in levels of insurance coverage. Women report higher rates of illness than men, which barring the idea that women are sicker than men, indicates women are more likely to seek medical care out and are therefore more likely to possess medical insurance. Gender-related disparities in access to healthcare are also related to socioeconomic factors including geographic job-market differences and differing levels of government assistance available to men and women. There are fewer job opportunities with insurance coverage available to men and women living in poorer communities, and of these opportunities, women tend to occupy more of the jobs with these benefits. Government assistance available to these individuals without job-related coverage varies between men and women, with women, especially women with children, receiving a higher percentage of available public assistance than men. Ultimately, for both men and women discrepancies in access to adequate healthcare is largely based on socioeconomic issues including income and full-time work status, with both groups of men and women with higher levels of income and full-time work receiving greater access to adequate healthcare. While gender and race play significant factors in explaining healthcare inequality in the United States, socioeconomic status is the greatest determining factor in an individual's level of access to healthcare. Socioeconomic differences vary between racial groups and its effects on health status. African Americans and Hispanics have a poverty rate of thirty three percent and twenty nine percent, which is significantly higher than the eleven percent in whites. Unfortunately, these socioeconomic disparities translate into three times higher death rates from heart disease in low-income blacks and whites when compared to their middle-income counterparts. In general, black women and men have higher rates of death from coronary heart disease among every income level when compared to whites, therefore, demonstrating that blacks tend to be in poorer health. In addition, cancer mortality is higher in blacks when compared to whites due inadequate preventative health screenings, or delays in diagnostics and treatment. Actions such as smoking also affect health. Even when black individuals obtain the same educational attainment as their white counterparts, research has demonstrated that an inequality in health, income, and employment remains. In addition, when studying inequalities it is important to note that the association between health and education is minimize when compared to the large inequality associated with health and income. Minority populations have increase exposure to environmental hazards that include lack of neighborhood resources, structural and community factors as well as residential segregation that result in a cycle of disease and stress. The environment that surrounds us can influence individual behaviors and lead to poor health choices and therefore outcomes. Minority neighborhoods have been continuously noted to have more fast food chains and fewer grocery stores than predominantly white neighborhoods. These food deserts affect a family’s ability to have easy access to nutritious food for their children. This lack of nutritious food extends beyond the household into the schools that have a variety of vending machines and deliver over processed foods. These environmental condition have social ramifications and in the first time in US history is it projected that the current generation will live shorter lives than their predecessors will. In addition, minority neighborhoods have various health hazards that result from living close to highways and toxic waste factories or general dilapidated structures and streets. These environmental conditions create varying degrees of health risk from noise pollution, to carcinogenic toxic exposures from asbestos and radon that result in increase chronic disease, morbidity, and mortality. The quality of residential environment such as damaged housing has been shown to increase the risk of adverse birth outcomes, which is reflective of a communities health. Housing conditions can create varying degrees of health risk that lead to complications of birth and long-term consequences in the aging population. In addition, occupational hazards can add to the detrimental effects of poor housing conditions. It has been reported that a greater number of minorities work in jobs that have higher rates of exposure to toxic chemical, dust and fumes. Racial segregation is another environmental factor that occurs through the discriminatory action of those organizations and working individuals within the real estate industry, whether in the housing markets or rentals. Even though residential segregation is noted in all minority groups, blacks tend to be segregated regardless of income level when compared to Latinos and Asians. Thus, segregation results in minorities clustering in poor neighborhoods that have limited employment, medical care, and educational resources, which is associated with high rates of criminal behavior. In addition, segregation affects the health of individual residents because the environment is not conducive to physical exercise due to unsafe neighborhoods that lack recreational facilities and have nonexistent park space. Racial and ethnic discrimination adds an additional element to the environment that individuals have to interact with daily. Individuals that reported discrimination have been shown to have an increase risk of hypertension in addition to other physiological stress related affects. The high magnitude of environmental, structural, socioeconomic stressors leads to further compromise on the psychological and physical being, which leads to poor health and disease. Reasons for disparities in access to health care are many, but can include the following: Health disparities in the quality of care exist and are based on language and ethnicity/race which includes: The National Stakeholder Strategy for Achieving Health Equity (NSS) provides a common set of goals and objectives for public and private sector initiatives and partnerships to help racial and ethnic minorities—and other underserved groups—reach their full health potential. Additionally, the Office of Minority Health has released the NPA Toolkit for Community Action. Community members can use the toolkit to engage fellow citizens and local media as they spread the word about health disparities and educate others about the impact disparities have in the lives of individuals and the greater impact on society. The Bay Area Regional Health Inequities Initiative (BARHII) provides a Health Planning Guide intended to help public health and planning departments collaborate on strategies to promote healthier communities. Each page links health risks to aspects of the built environment, outlining ways to ensure that neighborhoods are designed to support health equity and community well-being. The Commonwealth Fund, in a report on how to eliminate health disparities, says that the following steps should be considered in developing policies to eliminate racial and ethnic disparities: Other methods for ending health disparities or reducing health disparities have been suggested based on research that observes cultural differences within health care systems. According to the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the assisting authors Cindy Brach and Irene Fraserirector, in an effort to reduce disparities between racial and ethnic groups, the health care system should consider the following nine cultural competency techniques: The United States in the past has spent less on public health activities when compared to the administrative overhead of medical care and insurance, however, though the Affordable Care Act a projected $15 billion will be provided for expansion of public health services. An increase in public health spending by 10 percent has been associated with reductions in infant mortality by 6.85 percent, cardiovascular deaths by 3.22 percent, diabetes death by 1.44 percent and cancer deaths by 1.13 percent. Many minority communities lack sufficient funds and resources, therefore, these neighborhoods could benefit significantly from this added financial resource that can help narrow that gap of inequality. These additional measures will add to the benefits from expanded insurance coverage through the exchange programs, Medicare, and Medicaid. The ACA is providing the opportunity for millions of uninsured to have access to quality care. The previously uninsured will have multiple programs to help facilitate healthier living such as community promotoras, and racial and ethnic approaches to community health (REACH). Furthermore, the ACA is creating cultural and linguistic standards for healthcare professionals working in federally funded centers to maintain and meet the needs of the diverse population that is vulnerable to unequal access. Health inequality is the term used in a number of countries to refer to those instances whereby the health of two demographic groups (not necessarily ethnic or racial groups) differs despite comparative access to health care services. Such examples include higher rates of morbidity and mortality for those in lower occupational classes than those in higher occupational classes, and the increased likelihood of those from ethnic minorities being diagnosed with a mental health disorder. In Canada, the issue was brought to public attention by the LaLonde report. In UK, the Black Report report was produced in 1980 to highlight inequalities. On 11 February 2010 Sir Michael Marmot, an epidemiologist at University College London, published the Fair Society, Healthy Lives report on the relationship between health and poverty. Marmot described his findings as illustrating a "social gradient in health": the life expectancy of the poorest is seven years shorter than the most wealthy, and the poor are more likely to have a disability. In its report on the study, The Economist argued that the causes of this health inequality include lifestyles - smoking remains more common, and obesity is increasing fastest, amongst the poor in Britain. Despite dramatic improvements in health in general, significant inequalities in health among Canadians persist. Access to essential medical procedures is guaranteed by Medicare in Canada. Nevertheless, access to care issues are common and this is particularly the case in regards to required prescription medicines where income is a strong determinant of such access. It is believed however that health care issues account for a relatively small proportion of health status differences that exist among Canadians. As for differences in health behaviours (e.g., tobacco and alcohol use, diet, and physical activity, etc.), studies from as early as the mid 1970s—reinforced by many more studies since then—find their impact upon health to be less important than social determinants of health such as income and other social determinants of health. Instead, evidence indicates that health differences among Canadians result primarily from experiences of qualitatively different living conditions associated with the social determinants of health. As just one example, consider the magnitude of differences in health that are related to the social determinant of health of income. Income is especially important as it serves as a marker of different experiences with many social determinants of health. Income is a determinant of health in itself, but it is also a determinant of the quality of early life, education, employment and working conditions, and food security. Income also is a determinant of the quality of housing, need for a social safety net, the experience of social exclusion, and the experience of unemployment and employment insecurity across the life span. Also, a key aspect of Aboriginal life and the experience of women in Canada is their greater likelihood of living under conditions of low income. Income is a prime determinant of Canadians’ premature years of life lost and premature mortality from a range of diseases. Numerous studies indicate that income levels during early childhood, adolescence, and adulthood are all independent predictors of who develops and eventually succumbs to disease. In Canada almost a quarter of excess premature years of life lost (mortality prior to age 75) can be attributed to income differences among Canadians. These calculations are obtained by using the mortality in the wealthiest quintile of urban neighbourhoods as a baseline and considering all deaths above that level to be “excess” related to income differences. These analyses indicate that 23% of premature years of life lost to Canadians can be accounted for by differences existing between wealthy and other Canadians. What are the diseases that differentially kill people of varying income levels? Income-related premature years of life lost can be correlated with death certificate cause of death. Among the not-wealthy, mortality by heart disease and stroke are especially related to income differences. Importantly, premature death by injuries, cancers, infectious disease, and diabetes are also all strongly related to not being wealthy in Canada. These rates are especially high among the least well-off Canadians. In 2002, Statistics Canada examined the predictors of life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy, and the presence of fair or poor health among residents of 136 regions across Canada. The predictors included socio-demographic factors (proportion of Aboriginal population, proportion of visible minority population, unemployment rate, population size, percentage of population aged 65 or over, average income, and average number of years of schooling). Also placed into the analysis were daily smoking rate, obesity rate, infrequent exercise rate, heavy drinking rate, high stress rate, and depression rate. Consistent with most other research, behavioural risk factors were rather weak predictors of health status as compared to socio-economic and demographic measures of which income is a major component. For life expectancy, the socio-demographic measures predicted 56% of variation (total variation is 100%) among Canadian communities. Daily smoking rate added only 8% more predictive power, obesity rate only another 1%, and exercise rate nothing at all! For disability-free life expectancy, socio-demographics predicted 32% of variation among communities, and daily smoking rated added only another 6% predictive power, obesity rate another 5%, and exercise rate another 3%. Differences among Canadians communities in numbers of residents reporting poor or fair health were related to socio-demographics (25% predictive power) with smoking rate adding 6%, obesity rate adding 10%, and exercise rate adding 3% predictive power. Income-related effects are seen therefore in greater incidence and mortality from just about every affliction that Canadians experience. This is especially the case for chronic diseases. Incidence of, and mortality from, heart disease and stroke, and adult-onset or type 2 diabetes are especially good examples of the importance of the social determinants of health. While governments, medical researchers, and public health workers emphasize the importance of traditional adult risk factors (e.g., cholesterol levels, diet, physical activity, and tobacco and alcohol use), it is well established that these are relatively poor predictors of heart disease, stroke, and type 2 diabetes rates among populations. The factors making a difference are living under conditions of material deprivation as children and adults, stress associated with such conditions, and the adoption of health threatening behaviours as means of coping with these difficult circumstances. In fact, difficult living circumstances during childhood are especially good predictors of these diseases. In addition to predicting adult incidence and death from disease, income differences — and the other social determinants of health related to income — are also related to the health of Canadian children and youth. Canadian children living in low-income families are more likely to experience greater incidence of a variety of illnesses, hospital stays, accidental injuries, mental health problems, lower school achievement and early drop-out, family violence and child abuse, among others. In fact, low-income children show higher incidences of just about any health-, social-, or education-related problem, however defined. These differences in problem incidence occur across the income range but are most concentrated among low-income children. 
