 Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a skin disease that most commonly affects areas bearing apocrine sweat glands or sebaceous glands, such as the underarms, under the breasts, inner thighs, groin and buttocks. The non-contagious disease manifests as clusters of chronic abscesses, epidermoid cysts, sebaceous cysts, pilonidal cyst or multilocalised infections, which can be as large as baseballs or as small as a pea. It can also start as a single abscess and once it pops, can make tracts of many more abscesses. These cysts can be extremely painful to the touch and may persist for years with occasional to frequent periods of inflammation, culminating in incision and drainage of pus, often leaving open wounds that will not heal. For unknown reasons, people with Hidradenitis develop plugging or clogging of their apocrine glands. HS causes chronic scarring and pus formation of the underarms (axilla) and groin/inner thigh areas. The simple procedure of incision and drainage provides some relief from severe, often debilitating, pressure and pain. Flare-ups may be triggered by perspiration, hormonal changes (such as monthly cycles in women), humidity and heat, and friction from clothing. Persistent lesions may lead to scarring and the formation of sinus tracts, or tunnels connecting the abscesses or infections under the skin. At this stage, complete healing is usually not possible, and progression varies from person to person, with some experiencing remission anywhere from months to years at a time, while others may worsen and require multiple surgeries in order to live comfortably. Wound dehiscence, a premature "bursting" open of a wound, often complicates the healing process. Occurrences of bacterial infections and cellulitis (deep tissue inflammation) may occur at these sites. Hidradenitis suppurativa pain and depression can be difficult to manage. HS often goes undiagnosed for years because patients are too ashamed to speak with anyone. When patients see a physician or medical practitioner, the disease is frequently misdiagnosed or patients are prescribed ineffective treatments that can be temporary and sometimes even harmful. There is currently no known cure nor any consistently effective treatment. Carbon dioxide laser surgery is currently considered the last resort for those who have advanced to its highest stage, where the affected areas are excised, and the skin is grafted. Surgery does not always alleviate the condition, but may be very expensive. Several articles and clinics consider this disease as widely misdiagnosed, due to the misunderstanding of the causes and progression of the disease. HS is not caused by poor hygiene. HS is often called an orphan illness due to little current research being conducted on the topic. Since HS is considered a rare disease, its incidence rate is not well established, but has been estimated as being between 1:24 (4.1%) and 1:600 (0.2%). ;Other names for HS Hidradenitis suppurativa has been referred to by multiple names in the literature, as well as in various cultures. Some of these are also used to describe different diseases, or specific instances of this disease. A surgeon from Paris, Velpeau described an unusual inflammatory process with formation of superficial axillary, sub-mammary and perianal abscesses in 1839. One of his colleagues also located in Paris, named Verneuil, coined the term “hidrosadénite phlegmoneuse” approximately 15 years later. This name for the disease reflects the former pathogenetic model of acne inversa, which is considered inflammation of sweat glands as the primary cause of hidradenitis suppurativa. In 1922 Schiefferdecker suspected a pathogenic association between acne inversa and apocrine sweat glands. In 1956 Pillsbury postulated follicular occlusion as the cause of acne inversa, which they grouped together with acne conglobata and perifolliculitis capitis abscendens et suffodiens (dissecting cellulitis of the scalp) as the "acne triad". Plewig and Kligman added another element to their acne triad, pilonidal sinus. Plewig et al. noted that this new "acne tetrad" includes all the elements found in the original "acne triad", in addition to a fourth element, pilonidal sinus. In 1989, Plewig and Steger introduced the term "acne inversa", indicating a follicular source of the disease and replacing older terms such as "Verneuil disease". HS presents itself in three stages. Due to the large spectrum of clinical severity and the severe impact on quality of life, a reliable method for evaluating HS severity is needed. Evaluation should take into account the number, type and size of lesions, evolution, pain and repercussions for the quality of life of the patient. Such a comprehensive instrument does not yet exist, but there have been two successful attempts proposed to classify patients with HS according to the severity of their disease. This is historically the first classification system proposed, and is still in use for the classification of patients with skin/dermatologic diseases (i.e., psoriasis, HS, acne). Hurley separated patients into three groups based largely on the presence and extent of cicatrization and sinuses. It has been used as a basis for clinical trials in the past and is a useful basis to approach therapy for patients. These three stages are based on Hurley's staging system, which is simple and relies on the subjective extent of the diseased tissue the patient has. Hurley's three stages of hidradenitis suppurativa are as follows: The Sartorious staging system is more sophisticated than Hurley's, and is likely to supplant it as a means for conducting clinical trials during research. Sartorius et al. have suggested that the Hurley system is not sophisticated enough to assess treatment effects in clinical trials. The need for uniform outcome variables when reporting treatment effects has led to the proposition of a score by Sartorious and colleagues. This classification allows for better dynamic monitoring of the disease severity in individual patients and therefore forms a complementary system to the Hurley classification. They suggest a system that incorporates several of the involved areas of consideration: Points are accumulated in each of the above categories, and added to give both a regional and total score. In addition, the authors recommend adding a visual analog scale for pain or using the dermatology life quality index (DLQI, or the Skindex) when assessing HS. This system will likely be the basis of most future clinical trials and research studies. As this disease is poorly studied, the cause of Hidradenitis suppurativa remains unknown and experts disagree over proposed causes. Hidradenitis suppurativa occurs when apocrine glands become plugged. Lesions occur in areas of the body with numerous apocrine glands such as the axilla, groin, and perianal region. This theory includes most of the following potentials indicators: The historical understanding of the disease is that there are dysfunctional apocrine glands or dysfunctional hair follicles, possibly triggered by a blocked gland, creating inflammation, pain, and a swollen lesion. There are a number of triggering factors that should be taken into consideration, as it is advisable to avoid such triggers. In disease stage III, fistulas left undiscovered, undiagnosed, or untreated, can lead to the development of squamous cell carcinoma, a rare cancer, in the anus or other affected areas. Other stage III chronic sequelae may also include anemia, multilocalized infections, amyloidosis, and arthropathy. Stage III complications have been known to lead to death, but clinical data is still uncertain. Treatments may vary depending upon presentation and severity of the disease. Due to the poorly studied nature of this disease, the effectiveness of the drugs and therapies listed below is unclear, and patients should discuss all options with their physician or dermatologist. Nearly a quarter of patients state that nothing relieves their symptoms. Possible treatments include: Electron beam radiotherapy has been a successful treatment of hidradenitis, especially in Europe; it is not a common treatment option in most of the United States, as radiation oncologists generally refuse to treat patients with non-malignant diseases because of the potential for secondary radiation-induced tumors in the long term. When the process becomes chronic, wide surgical excision is the procedure of choice. Wounds in the affected area do not heal by secondary intention, and immediate application of a split thickness skin graft is more appropriate. 
