 The Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine was founded in 2009 by Donald Singer, a clinical professor, and poet and translator Michael Hulse. The founders "wished to draw together national and international perspectives on three major historical and contemporary themes uniting the disciplines of poetry and medicine: medicine as inspiration for the writings of poets; effects of poetic creativity on the experience of illness by patients, their families, friends, and carers; and poetry as therapy". One award is given for UK health students and National Health Service-related professionals, including educators, researchers, and biomedical scientists. A second, the International Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine, is an international award for unpublished poems in English by any living poet. The International Hippocrates Prize for Young Poets was launched in 2012, also given for an unpublished poem on a medical theme. The Hippocrates poetry and medicine initiative was awarded the 2011 Times Higher Education award for Excellence and Innovation. This aims to recognise the collaborative and interdisciplinary work that is taking place in universities to promote the arts. Entries were open to teams from all higher education institutions in the UK. The 2010 and 2011 International Symposia on Poetry and Medicine and Hippocrates Awards generated the International Hippocrates Research Forum for Poetry and Medicine. Founding judges were Dannie Abse, James Naughtie and Bruce Keogh. The inaugural 2010 awards were presented by the judges at a ceremony at an International Symposium on Poetry and Medicine at the University of Warwick. Each winner was awarded £5,000. There were over 1600 entries from 31 countries. The inaugural International Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine and International Symposium on Poetry and Medicine were supported by the Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine, the Warwick Institute of Advanced Study, and the Wellcome Trust. Symposium themes included history of poetry, poetry as therapy, poetry as inspiration for professional poets, doctor poets and poetry and HIV/AIDS in South Africa. An anthology of the 46 winning and commended poems in the Open International and United Kingdom NHS categories has been published. Open International Awards: NHS Awards: The judges for the 2011 Prize were Stephen P. Field, Chairman of the Royal College of General Practitioners, Poet Gwyneth Lewis and journalist Mark Lawson. There were around 1500 entries from 23 countries. The 40 Commendations in the 2011 Hippocrates Prize were awarded to entries from Canada (1), England (29), New Zealand (1), Scotland (2) and the USA (7). The 2011 Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine was supported by the Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine, HTI Heads Teachers and Industry and the Cardiovascular Research Trust. An anthology of the 46 winning and commended poems in the Open and NHS categories was published in May 2011. Open International Awards: NHS Awards: The judges for the 2012 Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine were poet Marilyn Hacker and journalist Martha Kearney. Open International Awards: NHS Awards: The judges for the 2013 Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine are poet Jo Shapcott, writer and Science Museums' Director Roger Highfield, and psychiatrist Theodore Dalrymple. In 2012, Donald Singer and Michael Hulse launched an annual Hippocrates Prize for Young Poets aged 14–18 years from anywhere in the world for an unpublished poem of up to 50 lines in English on a medical theme. The 2013 Hippocrates £500 Prize for Young Poets was judged by English poet and playwright Clare Pollard. The 2013 Hippocrates Awards will be announced at the 4th International Symposium on Poetry and Medicine in London on 18 May 2013. Open International Category NHS Category Judges for the 2014 Hippocrates Prize for Poetry and Medicine include poet Philip Gross. The closing date for the 2014 Prize is 31 January 2014. The 2014 Hippocrates Awards will be announced at the 5th International Symposium on Poetry and Medicine in London May 2014. 
