 Hormone replacement therapy refers to any form of hormone therapy wherein the patient, in the course of medical treatment, receives hormones, either to supplement a lack of naturally occurring hormones, or to substitute other hormones for naturally occurring hormones. Common forms of hormone replacement therapy include: Rodent Studies for HRT Many studies on the effects of Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) have been conducted on rats. Predominantly, these studies have looked at the effects of estradiol, a type of estrogen, on rats’ performances on various tasks. Often times, the rodents will be ovariectomized, meaning they have their ovaries removed. This prevents the production and release of estrogen and progesterone, and mimics the occurrence of menopause in human females. Once the ovaries have been removed, researchers will administer estrogen, progesterone, or both to see what the effects are on the rats’ behaviors. Rats are good animal models because they have similar cognitive deficits to humans as they age, and administering hormone therapy to them is easy . Overall, the results of these studies are non-conclusive. Some studies find impairments due to the HRT, where others find improvements. A common theme that runs through many studies is that rats that are given HRT perform better on tasks activating the hippocampus, and worse on tasks involving the prefrontal cortex. For example, Wang et al (2009) found that ovariectomized rats that were exposed to estradiol did considerably worse than rats who were not exposed to estradiol, on a delayed spatial reasoning task – a task that activates the prefrontal cortex . Another study that looked at the effects of estradiol in ovariectomized rats, found that when HRT was administered immediately following the removal of the ovaries, there was a decrease in anxious and depressive behaviors, while also improvement on cognitive performance on an object-placement task (though this was a hippocampal-based task) . Hence, the timing of the hormone replacement therapy and the activated brain regions are significant factors in assessing effectiveness of HRT. Another important aspect is whether or not the treatment is chronic or cyclic. Chronic treatment is daily doses of the hormone, while cyclic treatment is based on the normal cycling patterns of that hormone. One study found that the group of rodents, who received estradiol and a type of progesterone chronically, performed the worst on the maze task; whereas, the group who received only estradiol cyclically showed some improvements. More research in this area is needed. Some important results can be gathered from these rodent studies though. First, that differing brain regions may respond in a variety of ways to HRT. Second, that the timing of the therapy is integral to the chances of success. Third, that how the hormones are administered, either chronically or cyclically, may make an important difference in their effectiveness. 
