 Hwabyeong or Hwabyung, literally "anger illness" or "fire illness”, is a Korean somatization disorder, a mental illness. Hwabyung is only loosely used as the name of the disease, as it is actually more of a name regarding the cause. The word hwabyung is not in Asian dictionaries but simply is composed of the rootwords hwa meaning fire, and byung meaning syndrome or illness. In South Korea, it is also called ulhwabyeong (), "depression anger illness". This syndrome is brought on by the suppression and build up of anger within the body. Hwabyung is believed to be caused by a build-up of unresolved anger, which disturbs the balance of the five bodily elements. The triggering cause is external events, particularly intra-familiar stressors such as spousal infidelity and conflict with in-laws. Because of the cultural emphasis on familial harmony and peace, expressing anger is not acceptable. Therefore the anger is suppressed, and builds on itself over time. The suppressed anger, which turns into hate and despair, is known as han, or "everlasting woe". Once it reaches a pinnacle it will then manifest in several physical/mental signs such as, panic, fatique, and insomnia among others. Each experience, however similar, is different from others experiencing the illness. It most often occurs in middle-aged, menopausal women with relatively low socio-economic status. The individuals typically live in traditional families, which stress the value of males while devaluing women. In these families a woman's virtue is to quietly bear misfortune and unhappiness while maintaining harmony. Behavior related to hwabyeong includes sighing. In addition, sufferers might report such symptoms as a heavy feeling in the chest, perceived abdominal mass (previously thought to define the illness, but now believed to be atypical), sleeplessness, hot or cold flashes which coincide with menopausal symptoms, and blurred vision. They may also demonstrate typical neurotic symptoms such as anxiety, depression, obsessive-compulsiveness, as well as anorexia, paranoia or fearfulness, absent-mindedness and irritability. Western doctors are likely to diagnose it as a kind of stress or depression. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders currently lists hwabyeong among its culture-bound illnesses. Outside of Korea, informally hwabyeong may be mistaken as a reference to a psychological profile marked by a short temper, or explosive, generally bellicose behavior. To the contrary, hwabyeong is a traditional psychological term used to refer to a condition characterized by passive suffering, is roughly comparable to depression, and is typically associated with older women. It is important that when diagnosing Hwabyeong, the culture of the patient is well understood. Since Hwabyeong can often be misdiagnosed as depression the symptoms and culture need to be clearly and thoroughly looked into. Once Hwabyeong has been diagnosed past treatments need to be reviewed. The treatments for the patient can then be a combination of pharmacological, and therapy based interventions. http://yourhealth.asiaone.com/content/when-hakomi-meets-oriental-medicine==References== Published online 2009 March 31.doi: 10.4306/pi.2009.6.1.7 
