 The ileocecal valve, or ileocaecal valve, is a papillose structure with physiological sphincter muscle situated at the junction of the small intestine (ileum) and the large intestine, with recent evidence indicating an anatomical sphincter may also be present in humans. Its critical function is to limit the reflux of colonic contents into the ileum. Previous version of this page stated: 'The ileocecal valve is distinctive because it is the only site in the GI tract which is used for Vitamin B12 and bile acid absorption.[citation needed]' Citations: 1: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1769094 Chir Ital. 1991 Feb-Apr;43(1-2):49-54. (Italian Society of Surgery) [The ileocecal valve as a prognostic factor in extensive resection of the small intestine]. [Article in Italian] Fornaro R, Belcastro E, Lo Presti G, Carissimi T, Ferraris R. Source: Istituto di Clinica Chirurgica I, Università degli Studi di Genova. Excerpt from abstract: 'The ileocaecal valve, however, does play a substantial role, in that, on the one hand, it performs sphincter and barrier functions against ileocolic reflux of bacteria, while, on the other, its removal involves excision of the right colon (reserve area for reabsorption of water and ions) and of the terminal ileum (a site specialized in absorption of vitamin B12 and bile salts).' 2: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1949406 Urol Clin North Am. 1991 Nov;18(4):743-54. Nutritional and gastrointestinal complications of the use of bowel segments in the lower urinary tract. Steiner MS, Morton RA. Source: James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland. Excerpt from Abstract: 'The loss of the ileocecal valve and ileum segment accelerates intestinal transit time, which does not allow for complete digestion and absorption of food. Water and electrolytes remain associated with undigested food particles and may overwhelm the absorptive capacity of the colon, resulting in an osmotic diarrhea. A second problem is vitamin B12 deficiency. Surgical reduction of sites in the terminal ileum for active and exclusive uptake of vitamin B12 might lead to hypovitaminosis. If this is unrecognized, patients may develop irreversible neurologic injury.' Functionally, roughly two litres of fluid enters the colon daily through the ileocecal valve. The histology of the ileocecal valve shows an abrupt change from a villous mucosa pattern of the ileum to a more colonic mucosa. A thickening of the muscularis mucosa, which is the smooth muscle tissue found beneath the mucosal layer of the digestive tract. A thickening of the muscularis externa is also noted. There is also a variable amount of lymphatic tissue found at the valve. During colonoscopy, the ileocecal valve is used, along with the appendiceal orifice, in the identification of the cecum. This is important, as it indicates that a complete colonoscopy has been performed. The ileocecal valve is typically located on the last fold before entry into the cecum, and can be located from the direction of curvature of the appendiceal orifice, in what is known as the bow and arrow sign. Intubation of the ileocecal valve is typically performed in colonoscopy to evaluate the distal, or lowest part of the ileum. Small bowel endoscopy can also be performed by double-balloon enteroscopy through intubation of the ileocecal valve. Tumors of the ileocecal valve are rare, but have been reported in the literature. It was described by the Dutch physician Nicolaes Tulp (1593–1674), and thus it is sometimes known as Tulp's valve. 
