 The evidence that is needed to postulate the possibility and estimate the probability of the occurrence of medical conditions during space missions can be drawn from different sources. Some sources include: In-flight illness incidence rates are partially summarized in several publications. Evidence can also be obtained from the [cfm Longitudinal Study of Astronaut Health] database that is maintained at NASA JSC. Tables 8-1 through 8-3, which are taken from a collaborative review report that was edited by John Ball and Charles Evans, are illustrative of the conditions that could occur and some of the estimates of the probabilities. As most of these conditions do not represent medical emergencies, they could be treated by merely taking medications while on board, if available. About 75% of all astronauts have taken some form of medication during shuttle missions for non-emergency conditions such as motion sickness, headache, sleeplessness, and back pain. Other non-emergency conditions that the astronauts have experienced include minor trauma, burns, dermatologic and musculoskeletal conditions, respiratory illnesses and genitourinary problems, etc. More important is the existing evidence of potential medical emergencies during space flight, such as potentially fatal and nonfatal arrhythmias, heart attack, stroke, embolism, massive hemorrhage, emergencies that are related to renal stone formation, infection, and thrombotic complications. Among these conditions, only arrhythmias, renal colic, and infection have been documented. The documented arrhythmias were mostly mild abnormalities, such as occasional premature atrial contractions (PACs) and premature ventricular contractions (PVCs). PACs and PVCs were present in 30% of astronauts at some point during periods of strenuous activity. Potentially serious arrhythmias (superventricular tachycardia) have also been reported. For example, during Apollo 15, one crew member experienced ventricular bigeminy; ventricular ectopy was reported on Skylab; and on Mir, a crew member experienced a 14-beat run of ventricular tachycardia. No manifestation of coronary artery disease (CAD) was registered during any human space flight; however, considering the risk of cardiovascular events in older people and the increasing age of crew members, the possibility of such complications during long-term space missions cannot be ignored. Other medical emergencies that have been observed in space include rare but real, cases of urological and dental emergencies, as well as behavioral and psychiatric problems. Additional evidence and consideration substantiates the risk of the inability to treat crew members on Exploration missions. For example, in a few cases in the past, episodes of renal colic and arrhythmia have required that crew members (Russian cosmonauts) be brought back to Earth, shortening their stays in space and possibly compromising the missions. Radiation exposure could also cause other potential medical problems; for example, it might affect general health and cause radiation-specific pathological processes, especially given the proposed length of missions to Mars. If such emergencies were to occur, they would most likely me catastrophic and mission ending. Moreover, when designing space medical care systems, the potential for crew exposure to toxic chemicals and gases as well as to chemical and electrical burns must be considered. There are also risks for significant trauma, both on board the spacecraft and during EVAs, due to the nature of operational activities and the closed environmental systems. Lastly, given the length of Mars missions, there is also a certain age-related probability of the development of diverse medical conditions that are similar to those in the general population. These probabilities can be assessed based on general population health statistics as well as from information that is found in the astronaut pre- and post-flight health databases. The ground-based incidence of illness data are derived from publications and the available databases summarizing the occurrence of different medical conditions that are encountered in groups of individuals who are exposed to harsh environments that could be considered as analogs of the space environment. A sample of this information is presented in Tables 8-4 through 8-6. As can be seen from the tables, the incidence of different medical conditions in these environments was, in general, relatively low (from 10 to ~50 events per 100,000 person-days) and mostly these were non-emergent conditions. Even these illnesses (trauma, infection, psychiatric disorders) required an evacuation that would be difficult, if not impossible, to provide in space, however, especially on future missions to the moon and Mars. It is important to emphasize that crews that were living and working in harsh environments (Antarctic expeditions, submarines, and undersea habitats) also had medical emergencies, such as intracerebral hemorrhage, stroke, myocardial infarction, appendicitis, and bone fractures. There were also cases of cancer and psychiatric illness. However, the overall rate of these serious medical or surgical emergencies was low. The most common emergencies were dental. For instance, in 100 British Polaris submarine missions, crew members required 30 fillings and seven extractions due to intolerable pain. Dental problems had been the cause for a transfer at sea in the U.S. Polaris submarine program. Extractions and fillings have also been required in Antarctica. The calculated rate of significant illness or injury that is based on the meta-analysis of data from submarines, Antarctic expeditions, military aviation and U.S. and Russian space flight experience was found to be approximately 0.06 events/person-year. Extrapolation of these data to a 2.5 year Mars mission involving six crew members provides an expected rate of a significant medical event of 0.9 people/mission. In other words, on significant medical event could be expected per Mars mission. It is understandable that risk estimations that are made by using the data from analog populations have certain limitations for Mars mission risk assessments. These estimates are likely to be conservative, as they do not account for the unique problems that are associated with the spacecraft environments, possible radiation effects, as well as exposure and physiological adaptation to low gravity. Of particular interest is the incidence of cardiovascular event in the harsh-environment populations. For example, the reported 5-year annual cardiac events rate by age group among USAF aviators was: 0.0054% (30–34 years), 0.018% (35–39 years), 0.038% (40–44 years), 0.14% (45–49 years) and 0.13% (50–54 years). Of all of these events, 21% were cases of sudden death and 61% were diagnosed and treated as myocardial infarction. Therefore, despite the rigorous screening that USAF aviators undergo, very often the first manifestation of CAD in this population was significant cardiac event. It is believed that these data are applicable to the Astronaut Corps as well, despite the fact that astronauts undergo a more extensive medical assessment. In fact, this information emphasizes the risk of occurrence of sudden death or heart attack in space despite thorough screening. In the submarine program, the most common general surgical condition has been appendicitis, and even a case of death due to appendicitis has been reported among the participants of the Antarctic expeditions. Other serious conditions that were also reported in the submarine program were traumatic amputations, fractures, and dislocations. Furthermore, depression and anxiety reactions were found to be the most common two psychiatric diagnoses that are made on submarines, and are also frequent among researchers who are enduring long Antarctic winters. 
