 Imipramine (Tofranil), also known as melipramine, is an a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) of the dibenzazepine group. Imipramine is mainly used in the treatment of major depression and enuresis (inability to control urination). It has also been evaluated for use in panic disorder. Imipramine is used in the treatment of depression, such as depression associated with agitation or anxiety and has similar efficacy to the antidepressant drug moclobemide. Imipramine was, in the late 1950s, the first tricyclic antidepressant to be developed (by Ciba). At the first international congress of neuro-pharmacology in Rome, September 1958 Dr Freyhan from the University of Pennsylvania, USA, discussed as one of the first clinicians the effects of imipramine in a group of 46 patients, most of them were diagnosed as 'depressive psychosis'. The patients were selected for this study based on symptoms such as depressive apathy, kinetic retardation and feelings of hoplessness and despair. In 30% of all patients he reported 'optimal results and in around 20% failure. The side effects noted were classified as ' atropine-like and most patients suffered from dizziness. Imipramine was first tried against psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia, but proved insufficient. As an antidepressant, it did well in clinical studies and it is known to work well in even the most severe cases of depression. It is not surprising, therefore, that Imipramine is also known to cause a high rate of manic and hypomanic reactions, especially in patients with preexisting bipolar disorder. It is estimated that up to 25% of such patients maintained on Imipramine will switch into mania or hypomania. Such powerful antidepressant properties have made it favorable in the treatment of treatment-resistant depression. At the advent of SSRIs, its sometimes intolerable side-effect profile became more tolerable. Therefore, it became extensively used as a standard antidepressant and later served as a prototypical drug for the development of the later-released tricyclics. It is not as commonly used today, but is sometimes used to treat major depression as a second-line treatment. It has also seen limited use in the treatment of migraines, ADHD, and post concussive syndrome. Imipramine has additional indications for the treatment of panic attacks, chronic pain, and Kleine-Levin syndrome. In pediatric patients, it is relatively frequently used to treat pavor nocturnus and nocturnal enuresis. Imipramine, a tertiary amine, affects numerous neurotransmitter systems known to be involved in the etiology of depression, anxiety, ADHD, enuresis and numerous other mental and physical conditions. Imipramine is similar in structure to some muscle relaxants, and has a significant analgesic effect and, thus, is very useful in some pain conditions. The mechanisms of Imipramine's medicinal action include, but are not limited to, effects on: The potency (affinity) of imipramine and other antidepressants on various transporters and receptors are summarized below. Data are from "Pharmacology of antidepressant", Mayo Clin Proc, May 2001, Vol 76. Potency (affinity) data are expressed as the inverse of equilibrium dissociation constant multiplied by a factor of 10−7. So, the higher the number, the higher the blocking power. Imipramine is converted to desipramine, another TCA, in the body. Those listed in Italic text below denote common side effects. Those listed in bold text denote life-threatening side effects. Good doses of imipramine for an adult weighing about 70 kg (about 155 pounds): 5 mg to 25 mg per day, usually 5 mg to 10 mg per dose, up to a single daily dose of 25 mg. Dosages specified below are significantly too high. The symptoms and the treatment of an imipramine overdose are largely the same as for the other tricyclic antidepressants. Cardinal symptoms are cardiac (tachycardia, widened QRS complex) and neurological disturbances. Any ingestion by children should be considered as serious and potentially fatal. 
