 Independence Blue Cross (IBC) is a leading health insurer based in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in the United States. Together with its subsidiaries, IBC is one of the largest health insurers in the five-county southeastern Pennsylvania area of Bucks, Chester, Delaware, Montgomery, and Philadelphia counties. IBC provides health care coverage for more than 3.1 million members nationwide. More than 2.2 million of those members live in southeastern Pennsylvania, Delaware, and southern New Jersey. Employing nearly 4,800 people, the company serves the health needs of the region by offering a wide variety of health plans, including managed care, traditional indemnity insurance, Medicare, and Medicaid. Its network of health care providers includes nearly 160 area hospitals and more than 38,000 physicians and other health care professionals. Independence Blue Cross is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. Independence Blue Cross began in 1938 as the Associated Hospital Service of Philadelphia and offered the first prepaid hospitalization plan in the region. Philadelphia Mayor S. Davis Wilson enrolled as the first member, and Independence Hall became the first employer group to purchase coverage. By the end of its first year, the company had more than 160,000 members. By 1958, it employed 600 people and contracted with 94 hospitals. In 1988, the company began doing business as Independence Blue Cross. Since its inception, Independence Blue Cross has demonstrated a commitment to social responsibility and community involvement. Each year, it supports community education, sponsorships, and philanthropy, including a variety of programs and activities that help make health insurance more affordable to nearly 166,000 southeastern Pennsylvania residents. In addition, every year the Independence Blue Cross Blue Crew, the company’s corporate volunteer program, donates its time to a broad range of activities that contribute to the well-being of the people of the Philadelphia region. Some of these activities are: In addition to health care benefits, Independence Blue Cross offers specialized services and managed care expertise through its affiliates and subsidiaries. 
