 Intestinal malrotation is a congenital anomaly of rotation of the midgut (embryologically, the gut undergoes a complex rotation outside the abdomen). As a result: This can lead to a number of disease manifestations such as: The exact causes are not known. It is not associated with a particular gene, but there is some evidence of recurrence in families. Patients (often infants) present acutely with midgut volvulus, manifested by bilious vomiting, crampy abdominal pain, abdominal distention, and the passage of blood and mucus in their stool. Patients with chronic, uncorrected malrotation can have recurrent abdominal pain and vomiting. Malrotation can also be entirely asymptomatic. With acutely ill patients, consider emergency surgery laparotomy if there is a high index of suspicion. Plain radiography may demonstrate signs of duodenal obstruction with dilatation of the proximal duodenum and stomach but it is often non-specific. Upper gastrointestinal series is the modality of choice for the evaluation of malrotation as it will show an abnormal position of the duodeno-jejunal flexure (ligament of Treitz). In cases of malrotation complicated with volvulus, it demonstrates a corkscrew appearance of the distal duodenum and jejunum. In cases of obstructing Ladd bands, it will reveal a duodenal obstruction. In equivocal cases, contrast enema, may be helpful by showing the caecum at an abnormal location. It is usually discovered near birth, but in some cases is not discovered until adulthood. In adults, the "whirlpool sign" of the superior mesenteric artery can be useful in identifying malrotation. Treatment is possible and these are the steps taken: Resuscitate the patient with fluids to stabilize them before surgically With this condition the appendix is often on the wrong side of the body and therefore removed as a precautionary measure during the surgical procedure. One surgical technique is known as "Ladd's procedure", after Dr. William Ladd. Long term research on the Ladd procedure shows that even after the procedure, patients are susceptible to have complaints and might need further surgery. Scientific article with literature review on the topic published in 2011 
