 The International Academy of Oral Medicine and Toxicology is formally chartered as a Canadian non-profit corporation, representing dental, medical and research professionals who advocate mercury-free dentistry, the safe removal of mercury dental fillings, and improved standards for dental practices. The IAOMT North American office is located in Orlando, Florida, U.S.A. with international chapters in a dozen countries. The fundamental mission of the International Academy of Oral Medicine and Toxicology is to promote the health of the public at large. Essentially, the Academy shall continually examine and compile scientific research relating to the biocompatibility of oral/dental materials. This agenda should ensure a more informed use of these materials in clinical practice. Within these confines, the Academy shall: According to the IAOMT, potential health risks associated with mercury amalgams include: The mercury-free dentists represented by IAOMT cite the potential for excess exposure to mercury when removing amalgam fillings as a serious concern for dental practitioners, some of whom have devised various strategies for reducing the amount of mercury exposure for both patients and dental staff during the removal of mercury fillings. In September 2006, in response to a vote by two US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) panels to reject an FDA staff white paper on the safety of mercury-based dental fillings, the IAOMT has formally requested an expanded review of current science on dental mercury amalgams, a firm date for a hearing on the matter, and assurance that the full range of health issues arising from the use of mercury fillings is assessed. By a 13-7 margin, representatives from two FDA committees (meeting as a joint panel) rejected the FDA's white paper as insufficiently representative of current science on the health risks associated with what most consumers are told are 'silver fillings', but which are actually about half mercury by weight. The IAOMT has made several preliminary reviews of the toxicological data on fluoride, each time concluding that neither fluoridation of public drinking water supplies, nor fluoride prescriptions (as controlled-dose supplements), deliver any discernible health benefits; rather, the IAOMT found that fluoridation increases the incidence of adverse health effects. 
