 Isradipine (tradenames DynaCirc, Prescal) is a calcium channel blocker of the dihydropyridine class. It is usually prescribed for the treatment of high blood pressure in order to reduce the risk of stroke and heart attack. More recent research in animal models suggests that isradipine may have potential uses for treating Parkinson's disease Chan et al. 2007. Isradipine is given as either a 2.5mg or 5mg capsule. Common side effects include: -Dizziness -Warmth, redness, or tingly feeling under your skin -Headache -Weakness, tired feeling -Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, upset stomach -Skin rash or itching Serious side effects include: -Lightheadedness or fainting -Shortness of breath, especially from minimal physical activity -Swelling in the hands and feet -Rapid and/or heavy heartbeat -Chest pain If you experience one or more of these serious side effects, contact your health care provider immediately. There are other interactions beyond those listed below. Make sure to speak with a Pharmacist or Doctor if you have any concerns. Three major interactions are listed below. 1. It is advised that those using Isradipine not take Anzemet (Dolasetron), as both agents can cause a dose-dependent PR interval and QRS complex prolongation. 2. Onmel/Sporanox (Itraconazole) exhibits a negative inotropic effect on the heart and thus could spur an additive effect when used concomitantly with Isradipine. Onmel/Sporanox also inhibits an important cytochrome liver enzyme (CYP 450 3A4) which is needed to metabolize Isradipine and other Calcium Channel Blockers. This will increase plasma levels of Isradipine and could cause an unintentional overdose of the medication. Caution is advised when administering both agents together. 3. Zanaflex (Tizanidine) demonstrates anti-hypertensive effects and should be avoided in patients taking Isradipine due to the possibility of synergism between both medications. 4. The anti-biotic Rifadin (Rifampin) lowered plasma concentrations of Isradipine to below detectable limits. 5. Tagamet (Cimetidine) increased Isradipine mean peak plasma levels. A downward dose adjustment may be necessary with this particular instance of polypharmacy. 6. Severe hypotension was reported with Duragesic (Fentanyl) anesthesia when it was combined with other Calcium Channel Blockers. Even though Isradipine, another Calcium Channel Blocker, has not been used in conjunction with Fentanyl anesthesia in any studies, caution is advised. Note: There was no significant interaction between Isradipine and Warfarin (Coumadin), Isradipine and Microzide Hydrochlorothiazide, Isradipine and Lanoxin (Digoxin), and Isradipine and Nitrostat (Nitroglycerin). Symptoms of an Isradipine overdose include: -Lethargy -Sinus tachycardia -Transient hypotension 
