 Jian Zhou (1957-1999) (in Chinese convention Dr. Zhou Jian) is the Chinese virologist and cancer researcher, who with Australia’s Ian Frazer, invented the vaccine for stimulating human immunological resistance to the cervical cancer inducing human papilloma virus (Gardasil®, Cervarix®). Hundreds of millions of young women have now enjoyed the benefits of this life preserving vaccine against HPV, which causes 70% of the World’s 500,000 annual cervical cancers, which cancers originate 80% in developing countries and which cancers cause the deaths of some 250,000 women worldwide annually. Unlike his co-researcher Ian Frazer, however, Jian Zhou did not live long enough to see any of the fruits of his labors, to contemplate their unquantifiable benefit to human posterity or to enjoy the public adulation, rightly, accorded this sedulous achievement. In 1999, Jian Zhou succumbed to the sequela of a hepatitis, which he had contracted in childhood in his native South East China, where the disease is, unfortunately, still, even, to this day endemic. He did not even live long enough to see the U.S. patent for Ian Frazer’s and his vaccine and its method of production, and for which patent and priority they had both so long fought, finally, issue as U.S. patent 7,476,389, titled “Papilloma Virus Vaccines”, on January 13, 2009, after an Interference battle of over a decades length. Jian Zhou has been called “Vaccines Forgotten Man”. With Frazer, Zhou postulated a quite novel approach for vaccinating. This theretofore unheard of method for achieving immunization was to use then nascent recombinant DNA technology to replicate a virus’s innocuous, but, antigen laden and immunologically targeted, protein shell sans its pernicious core and, then, to introduce those, of themselves, harmless proteins (now known as VLPs or “virus like particles”) into the human body to stimulate an immunological response thereto. “We basically had the same idea, which was to create a synthetic replica of the human pappilloma virus known as a virus like particle.” – Ian Frazer. Zhou and Frazer began jointly investigating this approach to producing vaccine against and vaccinating against the human papilloma virus at the University of Queensland in 1984. While on August 20, 2007 delivering the United States Court of Appeal for the Federal Circuit opinion CAFC 2006-1154 (Ian Frazer & Jian Zhou v. Richard Schlegel and A. Bennet), that, finally, decisively, and conclusively ruled in favor of co-inventors Zhou and Frazer as to the Interference and their priority to the invention of VLPs, Circuit Judge Pauline Newman described the VLP invention in more detail as protein structures having an “external icosahedral shape of virus capsid and (which) thereby mimic the papilloma virus but Lack the disease causing genetic material.” and quoting from Zhou’s and Frazier’s July 20, 1992 PTC application in further detail “The method includes a initial step of constructing one or more recombinant DNA molecules which each encode papilloma virus LI protein or a combination of papilloma virus L1 protein and papillloma virus L2 protein followed by a further step of transfecting a suitable host cell with one or more recombinant DNA molecules so that, virus like particles (VLPs) are produced within the cell after expression of the L1 or L1 and L2 proteins. The VLPs are also claimed per se as well as vaccines incorporating the VLPs.” Ian Frazer has, to his enduring merit, forthrightly, adamantly and consistently credited his deceased friend and colleague Jian Zhou with alone devising the in vitro method and technology which, finally, after some decade of discouraging and demoralizing failures, succeeded at using recombinant DNA technology to fabricate the VLP of the pair’s invention and which was, first, successfully executed by Jian Zhou’s wife and fellow researcher Xiao – Yi Sun. ”From my point of view, I think having full public acknowledgement of Jian’s contribution to the work … is long overdue.” – Ian Frazer speaking at Dr. Jian Zhou’s belated 1 P.M. May 3, 2008 memorial service in Brisbane, Australia. Jian Zhou received his medical degree from South China’s Wenzhou Medical College near Shanghai. Jian Zhou was survived by his wife Xiao-Yi Sun and his and their only child, a son Andreas. “We owe him (Dr. Jian Zhou) a great deal because not only was he involved in developing the papilloma virus vaccine, but he also has mentored a whole generation of Chinese scientists in Australia, who are now going out there and doing equally interesting science.” – Ian Frazer, M.B.B.S. University of Edinburgh, British-Australian virologist and co-inventor of Gardasil®, also, at belated 1 P.M. May 3, 2008 memorial service for Dr. Jian Zhou in Brisbane, Australia 
