 Kali Pradip Chaudhuri is an orthopedic surgeon and the founder and CEO of the KPC Group, a company with interests in healthcare and related industries in both the United States and India. Chaudhuri has practiced medicine world-wide including in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom and in Southeast Asia. Chaudhuri moved to the United States in 1980 and currently resides in the town of Hemet in Riverside County, California. Born in India, he attended medical school at the National Medical College in Kolkata, then affiliated with the University of Calcutta, where he earned a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) and a Doctor of Medicine (MD). He graduated in 1968 and was later certified by the American Board of Orthopedic Surgeons . He is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons (FACS) and Fellow of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (FAAOS), and has been acknowledged by his peers in the healthcare industry through a number of awards and accreditations. He was the recipient of a lifetime achievement award for philanthropic contributions at the 25th Annual North American Bengali Conference. The KPC Group, founded by Kali P Chaudhuri, was the Grand Sponsor of the 2009 Conference. Chaudhuri had a 30-year career as an orthopedic surgeon before establishing himself as a businessman and entrepreneur in the healthcare industry. He previously served as the Chairman for the Department of Surgery at the Menifee Valley Medical Center, the Orthopedic Department in the Hemet Valley Community Medical Group and for the Orthopedic Department at the APEX Healthcare Medical Center. He is currently a member of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, a preeminent provider of education in the orthopedic medical field. He is also a member of the American College of Surgeons and the International College of Surgeons. Further, he served as an assistant professor at the Loma Linda University Medical School in Southern California for over ten years. Chaudhuri is also the founder and CEO of the worldwide company, The KPC Group. The company was founded in 1994 and has business portfolios in Healthcare, Pharmaceuticals, Biofuels, Information Technology, Educational Institutions, Real Estate, and Travel. Through its subsidiary Integrated Healthcare Holdings, Inc. (IHHI), a publicly held company (symbol IHCH), it owns and operates a chain of hospitals in Orange County, California. The KPC Group and its affiliates established one of the largest Independent Physicians Associations in Southwestern Riverside County with more than 1,200 physicians. 
