 Kinetic Concepts, Inc., (KCI) is an American multinational corporation that produces medical technology related to wounds and wound healing including therapeutic beds, wound care and tissue regeneration technology. KCI produced the first product developed specifically for negative pressure wound therapy. the company employs 6,800 people and markets its products in more than 20 countries. Its headquarters is in the University Heights neighborhood of San Antonio, Texas. KCI is composed of three business units: Active Healing Solutions, LifeCell and Therapeutic Support Systems, that operate in the wound care, regenerative medicine and therapeutic support systems markets. The largest of these business units is dedicated to wound care primarily negative pressure wound therapy for the treatment of traumatic wounds, pressure ulcers, chronic wounds and diabetic ulcers but also assistance with surgery. The therapeutic support systems developed and supplied by KCI are largely for the treatment and prevention of complications associated with patient immobility. These include support surfaces for hospital beds and home patients designed to address pulmonary complications in immobile patients. KCI also develops specialty beds for use in hospitals or in long-term care facilities. KCI expanded into the regenerative medicine market in 2008. Through subsidiary company LifeCell Corporation, KCI develops and supplies tissue-based products. These include tissue-based treatments used in surgical procedures to repair soft-tissue. KCI was founded in 1976 in San Antonio, Texas by Dr. Jim Leininger, an emergency room physician who wanted to help prevent the pulmonary complications associated with immobility. In time the company developed or acquired a line of therapeutic specialty beds, introducing in 1995 a specialty bed for acute care patients with pulmonary complications. Initially KCI's product development focused on therapeutic beds and surfaces but introduced the first commercial negative pressure wound therapy products in the mid-1990s. KCI acquired its regenerative medicine subsidiary, LifeCell, in 2008 in a non-hostile transaction for 1.7 billion. LifeCell's CEO is Lisa Colleran, who took on the role in August 2008 following the acquisition by KCI. From the founding of the company in 1976 to 1988, the revenue of KCI grew to 153.2 million. The growth in revenue allowed KCI to go public and trade on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in 1988. KCI stock was traded on the NYSE until 1997, when the company went private. In February 2004, KCI became a publicly listed company for the second time and was listed on the NYSE under the ticker symbol KCI. By the late 2000s the company's revenue was over $1 billion and reported an increase of 17 percent in 2007 to $1.61 billion. Revenue for 2008 was $1.88 billion, increasing to $1.99 billion in 2009 and in 2010 increased to $2.02 billion. On November 4, 2011, the company went private again at a price of $68.50 per share. 
