 The term Klismaphilia (sometimes spelled Klysmaphilia) refers to the receiving of sexual arousal from introducing liquids into the rectum and colon via the anus. This paraphilia often involves the use of enemas. The term klismaphilia was coined in 1973 by Dr. Joanne Denko, an early investigator in this field, to describe the activities of some of her patients. Klismaphiliacs can gain satisfaction through enema fantasies, by actually receiving one, or through the process of eliminating steps to receiving one. Klismaphilia is practiced by both men and women, although as with most paraphilias men are more likely to be klismaphiliacs. They may also gain pleasure from a large, water distended belly or the feeling of internal pressure. Often klismaphiliacs report discovering these desires after a chance administration of an enema sometime in their childhood, but some do report discovering these feelings later on. Klismaphilia is practiced both heterosexually and homosexually. The paraphilia may be used as a substitute or as an auxiliary by its practitioners for genital intercourse. Usually klismaphiliacs carry out normal lives and successfully engage in this behavior secretly. Klismaphiliacs may also try to get others to administer enemas under the pretense of being constipated. If this is the case they will probably try to conceal the pleasure they receive from these administrations. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR) classifies klismaphilia under the diagnosis of "Paraphilias, Not Otherwise Specified." The diagnostic code is 302.9. There is usually no question of treating klismaphilics since there is almost never any desire to be "cured". Health treatment for klismaphilia thus is typically only focused on ensuring the techniques employed and chemicals used are not harmful to the practitioner. Caution should always be maintained on the part of the practitioners experimenting with new techniques and concoctions; in certain cases cramps produced by the chemicals used have led to hospitalizations, in other circumstances the effects can even be life-threatening. 
