 Korsakoff's syndrome (also called Korsakoff's dementia, Korsakoff's psychosis, or amnesic-confabulatory syndrome) is a neurological disorder caused by a lack of thiamine (vitamin B1) in the brain. Its onset is linked to chronic alcohol abuse and/or severe malnutrition. The syndrome is named after Sergei Korsakoff, a Russian neuropsychiatrist who described it during the late 19th century. There are six major symptoms of Korsakoff's syndrome: These symptoms are caused by a deficiency of thiamine (vitamin B1), which is thought to cause damage to the medial thalamus and mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus as well as generalized cerebral atrophy. These brain regions are all parts of the limbic system, which is heavily in involved in emotion and memory. When Wernicke's encephalopathy accompanies Korsakoff's syndrome, the combination is called the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Korsakoff's is a continuum of Wernicke's encephalopathy, though a recognised episode of Wernicke's is not always obvious. Korsakoff's involves neuronal loss, that is, damage to neurons; gliosis which is a result of damage to supporting cells of the central nervous system; and hemorrhage or bleeding in mammillary bodies. Damage to the dorsomedial nucleus or anterior group of the thalamus (limbic-specific nuclei) is also associated with this disorder. Cortical dysfunction may have arisen from thiamine deficiency, alcohol neurotoxicity, and/ or structural damage in the diencephalon. Originally it was thought that a lack of initiative and a flat affect were important characteristics of emotion. Studies have questioned this, proposing that it is not necessarily a symptom of Korsakoff’s. Research suggesting that Korsakoff patients are emotionally unimpaired has made this a controversial topic. It can be argued that apathy, which usually characterizes Korsakoff patients, reflects a deficit of emotional expressions, without affecting the experience or perception of emotion. Korsakoff's Syndrome causes deficits in declarative memory in most patients, but keeps implicit spatial, verbal, and procedural memory functioning intact. Research has also suggested that Korsakoff patients have impaired executive functions, which can lead to behavioral problems and interfere with daily activities. It is unclear however, which executive functions are affected most. At first it was thought that Korsakoff patients used confabulation to fill in memory gaps. However, it has been found that confabulation and amnesia do not necessarily co-occur. Studies have shown that there is dissociation between provoked confabulation, spontaneous confabulation (which is unprovoked) and false memories. That is, patients could be led to believe certain things that haven’t happened, just like people without Korsakoff’s syndrome. Signs include: Conditions resulting in the vitamin deficiency and its effects include chronic alcoholism and severe malnutrition. Alcoholism may be an indicator of poor nutrition, which in addition to inflammation of the stomach lining, causes thiamine deficiency. Other causes include dietary deficiencies, prolonged vomiting, eating disorders, or the effects of chemotherapy. It can also occur in pregnant women who have a form of extreme morning sickness known as hyperemesis gravidarum. Mercury poisoning can also lead to Korsakoff's syndrome. It has also been caused by centipede (mukade) bites in Japan. PET scans show that there is a decrease of glucose metabolism in the frontal, parietal and cingulated regions of the brain in Korsakoff patients. This may contribute to memory loss / amnesia. Structural neuroimaging has also shown the presence of midline diencephalic lesions and cortical atrophy. A number of factors may increase a person's risk to develop Korsakoff's syndrome. These factors are often related to patients' general health and their food intake habits. The prevalence varies from country to country, but is estimated to be between 0-3% of the population. It was once assumed that anyone suffering from Korsakoff's syndrome would eventually need full time care. This is still often the case, but rehabilitation can help regain some, often limited, level of independence. Treatment involves the replacement or supplementation of thiamine by intravenous (IV) or intramuscular (IM) injection, together with proper nutrition and hydration. However, the amnesia and brain damage caused by the disease does not always respond to thiamine replacement therapy. In some cases, drug therapy is recommended. Treatment of the patient requires taking thiamine orally for 3 to 12 months, though only about 20 percent of the cases are reversible. If treatment is successful, improvement will become apparent within two years although recovery is slow and often incomplete. Treatment for the memory aspect of Korsakoff’s syndrome can also include domain-specific learning, which when used for rehabilitation is called the method of vanishing cues. Such treatments aim to use patients’ intact memory processes as the basis for rehabilitation. Patients who used the method of vanishing cues in therapy were found to learn and retain information more easily. The most effective method of preventing Korsakoff's syndrome is to avoid B vitamin/thiamine deficiency. In Western nations, the most common causes of such a deficiency are alcoholism and weight disorders. Thus, requiring companies that sell alcoholic beverages to supplement them with B vitamin/thiamine would avert many cases of Korsakoff's. A famous case study is recounted by Oliver Sacks in "The Lost Mariner" and "A Matter of Identity", which can be found in The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. Other cases include German entertainer Harald Juhnke, artist Charles Blackman, and entertainer Graham Kennedy. 
