 Lactational amenorrhea is the natural postnatal infertility that occurs when a woman is amenorrheic (not menstruating) and fully breastfeeding. If not combined with chemicals or devices, lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) may be considered natural family planning. For women who meet the criteria (listed below), LAM is 98% - 99.5% effective during the first six months postpartum. Ecological breastfeeding is a stricter form of LAM developed by Sheila Kippley, one of the founders of the Couple to Couple League. Studies have shown it has a 1% failure rate in the first six months postpartum, and a 6% failure rate before the woman’s first postpartum menstruation. The Standards of ecological breastfeeding are slightly different from the LAM criteria: The AAP recommends never co-sleeping or bed-sharing with an infant due to the increased risk of smothering and/or SIDS. Although, it bears mention that the AAP definition of co-sleeping is any non-crib surface. However, true co-sleeping simply indicates that child and parent(s) are within the same vicinity (ie baby's crib is placed in parents' room). Return of menstruation following childbirth varies widely among individuals. A strong relationship has been observed between the amount of suckling and the contraceptive effect, such that the combination of feeding on demand rather than on a schedule and feeding only breast milk rather than supplementing the diet with other foods will greatly extend the period of effective contraception. The closer a woman's behavior is to the Seven Standards of ecological breastfeeding, the later (on average) her cycles will return. Average return of menses for women following all seven criteria is 14 months after childbirth, with some reports being as soon as 2 months while others are as late as 42 months. Couples who desire spacing of 18 to 30 months between children can often achieve this through breastfeeding alone. Although the first post-partum cycle is sometimes anovulatory (reducing the likelihood of becoming pregnant again before having a post-partum period), subsequent cycles are almost always ovulatory and therefore must be considered fertile. However, some women find that breastfeeding interferes with fertility even after ovulation has resumed. Luteal phases being too short to sustain pregnancy is a common example. 
