 Lee C. Rogers (born February 27, 1978) is an American podiatrist from Simi Valley, California. He is most known for his work at Valley Presbyterian Hospital in Van Nuys preventing amputations in diabetes and Charcot foot. He is a Democratic candidate for US Congress in California's 25th district. Rogers was born in Elgin, Illinois to George Robert and Madelynn Jean Rogers and moved to Gallatin, Missouri at a young age. He attended primary and secondary school in Gallatin. He was awarded the Congress Bundestag Youth Exchange scholarship and spent his senior year in Uetersen, Germany. Rogers attended Truman State University in Kirksville, Missouri from 1996–2000. He graduated with a Doctor of Podiatric Medicine (DPM) from Des Moines University College of Podiatric Medicine in 2004 where he was president of the student body. He completed a residency in foot surgery at Saint Vincent's Catholic Medical Center in New York, NY and then later a fellowship in limb salvage and research with David G. Armstrong at Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science in North Chicago, IL. Following his fellowship, Rogers founded and directed the Amputation Prevention Center at Broadlawns Medical Center in Des Moines, Iowa. While in Iowa, Rogers described the 6 steps to preventing amputations and published a reduction in major amputations by 72%. Rogers won first place for outstanding research from the American Podiatric Medical Association (APMA) in 2007 for mesenchymal stem cell research on wounds and 2009 for hi-tech wound measurement techniques. He proposed simple measures to reduce costs of amputations in the healthcare system. Rogers was recruited to Valley Presbyterian Hospital by George Andros, MD, a renown vascular surgeon, to co-create the Amputation Prevention Center in Los Angeles. The doctors created an 8,000 square foot inpatient and outpatient specialty center which greatly improved upon limb salvage and wound healing rates. Rogers became co-director of the Global Diabetic Foot Conference (DFCon), an annual conference in Hollywood, California with 1000 participants from all 50 states and 40 different countries. In 2009, he became Chair of the Foot Care Council of the American Diabetes Association and his most noted accomplishment was the creation of consensus guidelines for the treatment of Charcot foot which took place at the Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris, France. The guidelines were jointly published in the Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association and Diabetes Care. He received the Rising Star Award from the APMA in 2011 for outstanding national accomplishments. He is an Assistant Professor of Podiatry at Western University of Health Sciences in Pomona, California. Rogers announced his candidacy for US Congress from California’s 25th district in August 2011. Rogers or his work has been quoted in the Wall Street Journal, U.S. News & World Report, the Washington Post, CBS News, and many medical specialty magazines. He has authored over 100 articles and book chapters. 
