 Legionnaires disease, is a potentially fatal pneumonia caused by Legionella pneumophila, a gram negative, aerobic bacteria that is carried by amoeba that thrive in stagnant water. During infection, the bacterium invades macrophages and lung epithelial cells and replicates intracellularly. It belongs to the genus Legionella. Legionella pneumophila was first identified in 1976. National surveillance systems and research studies were established early, and in recent years improved ascertainment and changes in clinical methods of diagnosis have contributed to an upsurge in reported cases in many countries. Environmental studies continue to identify novel sources of infection, leading to regular revisions of guidelines and regulations. There are about 8,000 to 18,000 cases of Legionnaires' disease each year in the United States, according to the Bureau of Communicable Disease Control. Between 1995 and 2005 over 32,000 cases of Legionnaires' disease and more than 600 outbreaks were reported to the European Working Group for Legionella Infections There is a shortage of data on Legionella in developing countries and it is likely that Legionella-related illness is underdiagnosed worldwide. Improvements in diagnosis and surveillance in developing countries would be expected to reveal far higher levels of morbidity and mortality than are currently recognised. Similarly, improved diagnosis of human illness related to legionella species and serogroups other than Legionella pneumophila would improve knowledge about their incidence and spread. A 2011 study successfully used modeling to predict the likely number of cases during Legionnaires’ outbreaks based on symptom on-set dates from past outbreaks. In this way, the eventual likely size of an outbreak can be predicted, enabling efficient and effective use of public health resources in managing an outbreak. The first recognized cases of Legionnaires' disease occurred in 1976 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania among attendees of a Legionnaires' convention held at the Bellevue-Stratford Hotel. Of the 2000 Legionnaires who attended the convention, 221 became ill and 34 of those died. Legionella pneumophila thrives in aquatic systems where it is established within amoeba in a symbiotic relationship. In the built environment, central air conditioning systems in office buildings, hotels, and hospitals are sources of contaminated water. Cooling towers used in industrial cooling systems as well as evaporative coolers, nebulizers, humidifiers, whirlpool spas, hot water systems, showers, windshield washers, fountains, room-air humidifiers, ice making machines, and misting systems typically found in grocery store produce sections. 
