 Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research (previously Leukaemia Research Fund) is the only charity in the UK exclusively dedicated to funding research into all blood cancers including leukaemia, lymphoma and myeloma. Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research’s vision is to beat blood cancers. They invest money into blood cancer research throughout the UK to ensure that all patients have their disease diagnosed early and accurately, receive personal, targeted treatments which are effective and have minimal side effects in order to beat or manage their cancer. Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research' was originally set up in 1960 as the Leukaemia Research Fund. The charity was started by the Eastwood family from Middlesbrough who began raising money following the death of their 6-year-old daughter Susan. In 1960 children diagnosed with leukaemia had a very poor chance of survival and Susan’s parents were determined to make something positive come from their personal tragedy, so they started fundraising for research that would find a cure for leukaemia. Since then the charity has expanded to include over 150 branches. The research funded by the charity has enabled more people than ever before to survive blood cancer. The survival rate for the most common form of childhood leukaemia has increased to over 90%, and for adults the survival rate is now as high as 70-80% for some forms of blood cancer. Research In the financial year 2010/2011 the charity reported a 15% increase in voluntary income and a 30% increase in investment in new research commitments compared with the previous year. The charity raised a total of £20m in the year (2010: £19m) and was able to spend £24m (2010: £18m) on charitable activities. TAP In 2011 the charity launched their ground breaking new project the Trials Acceleration Programme (TAP). This programme aims to make the process of clinical trials quicker and easier within the UK. TAP links 13 treatment centres around the UK coordinated by a central hub in Birmingham to set up more clinical trials in blood cancer. TAP breaks down the barriers that exist in the UK in getting new treatments to blood cancer patients when they most need them. The charity receives no government funding and is entirely dependant on voluntary donations from fundraising events or individuals in order to fund its research. Fundraising Events The charity holds a number of fundraising events throughout the year including several shows at the Royal Albert Hall and sports events such as The London Bikeathon, which is the largest independently organised bikeathon in the capital. Sports Events Supporters of the charity take part in a number of sporting events throughout the year. The events include running, cycling, swimming, triathlons and challenges. Their bright iconic t-shirts can often be seen at events up and down the country, as many supporters take part throughout the year as part of the charity’s sports team “The Unstoppables”. Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research also write and publish patient information booklets which provide information on a wide range of subjects including blood cancers and related disorders, clinical trials and booklets specifically designed for children with blood cancers. The charity has a number of celebrity supporters, including Alastair Campbell who is currently their Chairman of Fundraising, their patron the Duke of Kent, Sir Ian Botham who is the president of the charity and the Calendar Girls who have raised over £3million with their story since 1999. 
