 Lichen sclerosus (LS) (also known as "Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus") is a disease of unknown cause that results in white patches on the skin, which may cause scarring on and around genital skin. Several risk factors have been proposed, including autoimmune diseases, infections and genetic predisposition. There is evidence that LS can be associated with thyroid disease. Lichen sclerosus (LS) is also known as lichen sclerosus et atrophicus (LSA), balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO), Csillag's disease, Lichen albus, Hypoplastic dystrophy, White Spot Disease and kraurosis vulvae. Typically it's called LSA or BXO when it affects men, LS when it affects women or in referring to the disease in general. Sometimes, LS can be found on pediatric patients and men from all ages. Children being diagnosed with Lichen Scleroses is extremely rare. LS is usually found in the groin area, but sometimes on the upper leg or thigh. Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus was first described in 1887 by Dr. Hallopeau. Since not all cases of lichen sclerosus exhibit atrophic tissue, et atrophicus was dropped in 1976 by the International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Disease (ISSVD), officially proclaiming the name lichen sclerosus. Women are more commonly affected than men (10 to 1 ratio), particularly around and after menopause, but younger women or girls may also develop the disease. The condition most commonly occurs on the vulva and around the anus with ivory-white elevations that may be flat and glistening. There may be marked itching or the condition may be without any symptoms. There may also be thinning and shrinkage of the genital area that may make coitus, urination, and defecation painful. In males, the disease may take the form of whitish thickening of the foreskin, which cannot be retracted easily (phimosis). In contrast to women, there is no perianal involvement. In men, this genital involvement has traditionally been known as balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO). On the non-genital skin, the disease may manifest as porcelain-white spots with small visible plugs inside the orifices of hair follicles or sweat glands on the surface. Thinning of the skin may also occur. Although it is not clear what causes LS, four theories have been postulated. Lichen Sclerosus is not contagious; it cannot be caught from another person. Autoimmunity is a process in which the body fails to recognize itself and therefore attacks its own cells and tissue. Specific antibodies have been found in LS. Furthermore, there seems to be a higher prevalence of other autoimmune diseases such as diabetes mellitus type 1, vitiligo and thyroid disease. Both bacterial as well as viral pathogens have been implicated in the etiology of LS. A disease that is similar to LS, acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. Viral involvement of HPV and hepatitis C are also suspected. A link with Lyme Disease is shown by the presence of Borrelia burgdorferi in LSA biopsy tissue. Since LS in females is primarily found in women with a low estrogen state, hormonal influences were postulated. To date though, very little evidence has been found to support this theory. Some findings suggest that LS can be initiated through scarring or radiation, although these findings were sporadic and very uncommon. The disease often goes undiagnosed for several years, as it is sometimes not recognized and misdiagnosed as thrush or other problems and not correctly diagnosed until the patient is referred to a specialist when the problem does not clear up. It is rare for a biopsy of the affected skin to be taken, especially so in children. A biopsy is only performed if there is suspicion of cancer or vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. When a biopsy is done, hyperkeratosis, atrophic epidermis, sclerosis of dermis and lymphocyte activity in dermis are histological findings associated with LS. The biopsies are also checked for signs of dysplasia. LS is usually treated with potent topical steroids, like Clobetasol propionate. These can relieve symptoms and prevent scarring. Circumcision may be recommended in males to correct phimosis. It is not considered beneficial to remove LS-affected skin that is not located on the genitals, as it also tends to relapse. In females, recent studies indicate that the injection of PRP (Platelet-rich plasma) and stem cells in site may reduce symptoms and improve lesions. The usefulness of this treatment in males is under study. A recent study has shown long-term antibiotic treatment to be effective with all patients, showing a significant response within a few weeks. Distress due to the discomfort and pain of Lichen Sclerosus is normal, as are concerns with self-esteem and sex. Counseling can help. According to the National Vulvodynia Association, which also supports women with Lichen Sclerosus, vulvo-vaginal conditions can cause feelings of isolation, hopelessness, low self-image, and much more. Some women are unable to continue working or have sexual relations, and may be limited in other physical activities. Depression, anxiety, and even anger are all normal responses to the ongoing pain LS patients suffer from. The disease can last for a considerably long time. Occasionally, "spontaneous cure" may ensue, particularly in young girls. Lichen sclerosus is associated with a higher risk of cancer. Skin that has been scarred as a result of lichen sclerosus is more likely to develop skin cancer. Women with lichen sclerosus may develop vulvar carcinoma. Periodic consultation is therefore necessary. Support Groups Medical Pictures 
