 __NOTOC__ This article provides a list of diseases with possible (but unconfirmed) infectious etiologies. Many chronic diseases are linked or associated with infectious pathogens. A disease is said to be linked or associated with an infectious pathogen when that pathogen is found more frequently in patients with the disease than in healthy controls. Often, infectious pathogens associated with a disease may be suspected of playing a causal role in that disease — and some scientists believe a substantial portion of chronic diseases may in part be caused by infectious agents — though association alone does not automatically prove causality (because correlation does not imply causation). Indeed, the terms linked and associated are used here in a strict technical sense: they mean there is a frequent co-occurrence of certain pathogens in certain diseases; but it should not be read that linked and associated imply there is a proven causal relationship between pathogen and disease. An observed association only flags up the possibility that there might be a causal relation. For an infectious pathogenic microbe that has been noted to frequently accompany a disease, there are several logical possibilities that can explain this observed association: Determining whether a pathogen plays a causal role in a chronic disease is often difficult for the following reasons: In spite of the difficulties in obtaining proof of causality, evolutionary biologist Paul W. Ewald and physicist Gregory M. Cochran are noted for their assertion that many common chronic diseases of currently unknown etiology are likely caused by chronic low-level microbial infection, countering the prevailing view that genes are predominantly responsible for the development of chronic disease. Ewald and Cochran support their thesis with the logic of evolutionary biology, with Ewald explaining that: "chronic diseases, if they are common and damaging, must be powerful eliminators of any genetic instruction that may cause them." In other words, any disease-causing gene that reduces survival and reproduction will eliminate itself over a number of generations, just by evolutionary pressures; therefore such genetic diseases are self-extinguishing. Ewald says the only genetic diseases that will persist are those that provide a compensating benefit. For example, genes that encode for sickle cell anemia disease are maintained and persist down generations, as these genes also protect against malaria, which kills millions worldwide each year. Infectious pathogens are of course one of several potential causes of disease; other causal factors include: environmental toxins, certain types of radiation exposure, diet and lifestyle factors, stress, genetics and epigenetics. All these factors are generally explored as potential causes of a disease. Diseases may also be multifactorial, such that the disease only manifests when multiple causal factors occur in combination. For example: in a murine model, Crohn's disease can be precipitated by a norovirus, but only when both a specific gene variant is present and a certain toxin has damaged the gut. Thus a pathogen's causal role in a disease may well be contingent upon several other causal factors. Infectious pathogen-associated diseases include many of the most common and costly chronic illnesses. About 70% of all deaths in the United States result from chronic diseases, with the treatment of chronic diseases accounting for 75% of all US healthcare costs (amounting to $1.7 trillion annually). In the list of diseases associated with infectious pathogens given below, bear in mind that there is no definitive proof that the associated pathogens do play a causal role in the disease, just a possibility that they might. Further research is required to determine whether or not these pathogens participate causally in their associated diseases. Note that this list covers some of the most common human diseases associated with infectious pathogens, but it is not intended to be a comprehensive list. For some selected pathogens, the set of their disease associations is shown in the bar graphs below. For each bar below, the pathogen in question has been found more frequently in patients with the listed diseases than it has in healthy controls — but it has not been proven that the pathogen plays any causal role in the listed diseases; though usually investigations to examine whether it might participate causally are ongoing. By contrast, the diseases below enclosed in brackets ( ) indicate that the pathogen is a proven cause of that disease. 
