 This is a list of notable people who have survived the infectious disease poliomyelitis. Poliomyelitis (often simply called polio) is an acute viral infection that involves the gastrointestinal tract and occasionally the central nervous system. Poliovirus is acquired by faecal-oral or oral transmission. Prior to the introduction of a vaccine in 1955, infection was common, with epidemics during the summer and autumn of temperate countries. An eradication programme has reduced the number of reported polio cases worldwide by more than 99% since the mid-1980s. Most infections are asymptomatic; a small number cause a minor illness that is indistinguishable from many other viral illnesses; less than 1% result in acute flaccid paralysis. The extent of paralysis varies from part of a limb to quadriplegia and respiratory failure. The latter was often treated with an iron lung until, it was hoped, the patient recovered. Around 30–40 years after contracting paralytic poliomyelitis, about 25–40% of cases lead to post-polio syndrome. Symptoms include muscle pain, further weakening of muscles and paralysis. Surviving paralytic polio can be a life-changing experience. Individuals may be permanently physically disabled to varying degrees. Others remember the fear and isolation. Some continue to campaign for polio eradication or disability rights. This categorised alphabetical list contains only those people with a firm and uncontested diagnosis made while still alive. Jean Brackenbury 1933-2006. Housewife and mother of 7 children. Contraced Polio in 1953 whilst pregnant with her first child. Went on to fight against intolerance and bigotry of her wish to have a large family. Suffered much criticism and featured in many National Newspapers each time she had a child/twins. She watched helplessly as one of her twin boys drowned in 1957. She and her family were the object of vandalism and attacks in Leigh and Barton on Humber. In her later years she developed Diabetes and had both legs amputated, developed PPS and lost the use of her arms. Jean recorded her life story in 2004 and copies have been lodged with major Archives in the UK. She was cremated in Dec 2006 and her ashes taken back to her home in Boston Lincolnshire and scattered with her fathers. A brave woman and wonderful mother and never accepted that she was disabled. The following people were not diagnosed with polio during their lifetime. A retrospective diagnosis is speculative and can never be certain. The following people may have had polio, but there is disagreement over it. The following people are often reported to have had polio, but their own statements or other evidence contradict this. 
