 The following list of optometry schools covers many countries, although the list is not exhaustive. Internationally, optometry as a profession includes different levels of education. The institutions listed below provide academic and professional education and clinical training that ranges from Doctor of Optometry degree level to other professional degrees in optometry and also non-degree level education leading to a diploma or other qualifications in optometry. In many countries the role of optometry is statutorily defined, practice is regulated and there is uniformity in professional education and clinical training and the scope of practice is consistent with the definition of optometry as a profession. In such countries the nomenclature of terminal qualification may be reviewed as and when necessary. In Australia, for example, Doctor of Optometry (OD) is now established at University of Melbourne (first intake 2011) and OD is described as "an internationally recognised qualification and the gold standard for optometry education." This is a list of optometry schools sorted alphabetically by country. For more details Postgraduate education in optometry in India is also offered leading to M.Optom, MSc, MPhil and PhD by several universities and institutions. The following list includes educational institutions offering four-year degree courses, and also two-year diploma and other non-degree courses: Educational Institutions Currently there are seven state universities (in Milano, Padova, Lecce, Roma, Firenze, Napoli, and Torino) offering three-year university degrees in optics and optometry (Ottica e Optometria), formally a kind of a physics degree. There are three schools offering the O.D. (Doctor of Optometry) degree. In 2009 University of Manchester (UK) and Singapore Polytechnic set up a degree course in optometry within the premises of Singapore Polytechnic. The degree is not recognised by the General Optical Council (GOC) in the United Kingdom . This course has since been stopped. School of Ophthalmic Technology, established in 1983 by ministry of health at National Eye Hospital Colombo with the initiation of Dr. C E Parker III. Honours the Diploma in Ophthalmic technologist. Still a degree programme does not exist. These ophthalmic technologists are trained for the purpose of government hospitals. The course is also undergone by other SAARC countries: Nepal, Maldives and Pakistan. Meantime part time courses are conducted by private institutes to provide diploma for private sectors. Namely EYE CARE INSTITUTE and SRI LANKA OPTOMETRIST ASSOCIATION. The government of Sri Lanka does not recognize optometry as a profession and has no rule and regulation to date. There is currently 1 university offering a bachelor's degree in optometry and 2 educational institutions offering an associate degree in optometry: There are 9 educational institutions in the United Kingdom offering degrees in optometry. Six are located in England with one optometry school in each of Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland. Additionally, in England, the Institute of Optometry offers a post-graduate professional doctorate (Doctor of Optometry degree) in partnership with London South Bank University. There are 21 American educational institutions offering the Doctor of Optometry degree. 
