 Lugansk State Medical University is a higher educational establishment in Luhansk (Ukraine). It was founded on May 6, 1956. The university has , as of 2012 more than 3000 students including students from over 60 countries. Graduates are eligible for the United states ECFMG certification and are also eligible for certification in Canada and many other countries after after clearing medical licensing examination of these countries. There are 22 clinical and 18 theoretical professorships, and over 400 instructors, including 76 doctors of science; over 87% of its instructors have higher scientific degrees. Most program are offered with either English or Russian, as the language of instruction. The leading fields of research at the university are the medical aspects of ecological problems in the heavily industrialized Donbass region., and the development and application of medical life support for casualties in man-made disasters. The university publishes scientific journals and collections of articles. There are six faculties: Specialty and specialist’s qualification: 7.110101 “General Practice” – general practitioner Forms and terms of studying: at the expense of state budget (only for Ukrainian citizens) and of private persons during 6 years Dean of the Faculty: d.m.s., prof. Smirnov Serhiy Mykolayvych The Second Medical Faculty Specialty and specialist’s qualification: “Pediatrics” – pediatrician Forms and terms of studying: at the expense of state budget (only for Ukrainian citizens) and of private persons during 6 years Dean of the faculty: d.m.n., assistant professor Sirotchenko Tamara Anatoliyvna History Pediatrics faculty was founded in 1983 when the first pediatricians entered the university. Since that time more than 1500 pediatricians graduated from the faculty. The students of the faculty were always noted with discipline, diligence and serious attitude to studying. So it is not surprising that every year 10-25% of graduates get honours degrees. The graduates of the faculty successfully work in different regions of our country and abroad. Many of them hold leading positions in their establishments and have the highest qualification levels. Specialty and specialist’s qualification: 7.12020101 “Pharmacy” – pharmacist 7.12020104 “perfumery and Cosmetic Technologies” – pharmacist-cosmetologist Forms and terms of studying: full-time, at the expense of state budget (only for Ukrainian citizens) and of private persons during 5 years; extra-mural, at the expense of private persons during 4,5 years (for junior specialists-pharmasists), 4,5 years (for persons with higher medical, chemical&thechnological and chemical&biological education), 5 years (for junior specialists-doctors) and 5,5 (for persons with secondary education) History At the end of the 20th century there was a need in highly educated pharmacists in Eastern Ukraine region. At that time only one school trained such specialists. In 1998 the Ministry of Education of Ukraine gave the permission to the university to train pharmacists of the highest educational level and Pharmaceutical Faculty was opened. And young people of our region got the opportunity to get one of the most prestigious profession not only in Ukraine but in the world as well. The founder, the creator, the inspirer and the first dean was the head manager of “Pharmacia Enterprises”, the head of the Chair of Technology of Drugs, Pharmacy Technologies Organization and Economics, d.farm.s., prof. Gudzenko O.P. Within 13 years 501 specialist graduated from the faculty. At present there are 128 full-time students and 321 extra-mural ones. Specialty and specialist’s qualification: 7.12010005 “Dentistry” – dentist Forms and terms of studying: at the expense of state budget (only for Ukrainian citizens) and of private persons during 5 years Dean of the Faculty: candidate of science (medicine), associate professor Bobrysheva Inesa Venedyctyvna History The Faculty of Dentistry of SE “LSMU” was founded 1998. On February 10, 1998 the Ministry of Education of Ukraine gave the permission to train students of this specialty with licensed amount of 75 persons. Some chairs for the faculty were created. The main directions of dental education are surgical dentistry, therapeutic dentistry, pediatric dentistry, orthopedic dentistry. Dean of the Faculty: candidate of science (medicine), associate professor Toropchyn Vasyl Ivanovych History In 1980-s the equipment and scientific and teaching experience enabled the university to train students from abroad. And in 1983, according to the orders of Ministry of Education of Ukraine and Ministry of Public Health of Ukraine, the training of foreign students started. Everything was founded from zero: proper hostels, the Russian Language Chair, changes in curriculums and syllabuses, training of lecturers and so on. In 1983 fifty five students from 16 countries of Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Middle East entered the faculty. In 1990-s representatives of 43 countries studied in the university. Now the geography of our students is the following: Asian countries – 533, the Middle East and Africa – 237, Latin America – 188. By 2006 the faculty had trained 1012 general practitioners, 64 residents and 15 candidates of medical sciences from more than 60 countries of the world. Dean of the faculty: candidate of science (medicine), associate professor Nalapko Yuriy Ivanovych History The faculty is one of the leading units of the university oriented on teaching, researching and treating. It was opened in 1979. First, there were 5 chairs, but now it has 8 ones. And today the faculty continues to gain the rate. According to the public health service reforming, faculty’s work is aimed to the training of competitive specialists on the basis of lifelong education. They are primary specialization (internship), secondary specialization and improvement of skills. The faculty conducts specialization in 11 specialties, improvement in 14 ones. Every year nearly 500 young doctors get specialty and more than 1200 doctors of the region improve their skills. The staff of the faculty has 11 doctors of medical sciences, professors, 30 candidates of medical sciences, 14 assistant lecturers. The clinical base is enlarging constantly. The workers of the faculty conduct clinical treatment work in all clinical directions, make the most difficult operations, treat patients with the hardest pathologies, develop new methods of treatment, diagnostics, rehabilitation and prevention. The main task for the future is implementation of the new concept of constant postgraduate education according to the international standards. List of Internship Specialties 1. Obstetrics and gynecology 2. Anesthesiology and intensive therapy 3. Internal diseases 4. Dermatovenerology 5. Children’s anesthesiology 6. Children’s otolaryngology 7. Children’s surgery 8. General practice – family medicine 9. General pharmacy 10. Infectious diseases 11. Clinical oncology 12. Emergency medicine 13. Neurology 14. Neonatology 15. Orthopedics and traumatology 16. Otolaryngology 17. Ophthalmology 18. Pathologic anatomy 19. Pediatrics 20. Psychiatry 21. Pulmonology and Phthisiology 22. Radiology 23. Dentistry 24. Urology 25. Surgery Official site 
