 Marcia C. Inhorn is the William K. Lanman Jr. professor of anthropology and international affairs in the Department of Anthropology and The Whitney and Betty MacMillan Center for International and Area Studies at Yale University. She also serves as Chair of the Council on Middle East Studies. Before coming to Yale in 2008, Inhorn was a professor of medical anthropology at the University of Michigan and director of the Center for Middle Eastern and North African Studies there. As a medical anthropologist, Inhorn served as president of the Society for Medical Anthropology of the American Anthropological Association and program chair of the Yale SMA conference on "Medical Anthropology at the Intersections: Celebrating 50 Years of Interdisiciplinarity." Currently, she serves on the Middle East Studies Association Board of Directors. A specialist on Middle Eastern gender and health issues, Inhorn has conducted research on the social impact of infertility and assisted reproductive technologies in Egypt, Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates, and Arab America over the past 20 years. Inhorn is the current and founding editor of the Journal of Middle East Women’s Studies. She is also associate editor for population and health of the journal Global Public Health, and co-editor of the "Fertility, Reproduction, and Sexuality" series at Berghahn Books. She is also editor or co-editor of eight volumes on medical anthropology, gender, reproduction, and the Middle East. A specialist on Middle Eastern gender and health issues, Inhorn has conducted research on the social impact of infertility and assisted reproductive technologies (ARTS) in Egypt, Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates, and Arab America over the past 20 years. She is the first anthropologist to study infertility in the non-Western world, beginning with research in the late 1980s among the urban Egyptian poor. There, she discovered the complex “quest for conception”—involving both traditional and Western biomedicine—undertaken by many infertile women in an attempt to overcome their stigmatizing childlessness. She also theorized infertility as a form of “lived patriarchy” for poor women, even though many poor husbands in Egypt were supportive and loving toward their infertile wives. Returning to Egypt in the mid-1990s, Inhorn examined the introduction of both in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) (a variant of IVF to overcome male infertility) in that country. She discovered the numerous “arenas of constraint,” or structural, ideological, and practical obstacles and apprehensions faced by urban Egyptian elites in their struggles to overcome infertility through the use of ARTs. These two research projects resulted in the publication of Inhorn’s “Egyptian trilogy”—three award-winning books on the impact of infertility, childlessness, reproductive medicine, and the globalization of ARTs to Egypt at the turn of the century. Since 2000, Inhorn has undertaken three more major research projects on Middle Eastern infertility and assisted reproduction, with support of the U.S. Department of Education. Fulbright-Hays Faculty Research Abroad Program and the Cultural Anthropology Program of the National Science Foundation. As a Visiting Research Professor at the American University of Beirut, Lebanon in 2003, Inhorn examined the impact of male infertility in the era of ICSI. Inhorn discovered that male infertility is highly prevalent in the Middle East and is probably genetically related to consanguineous (cousin) marriage. Increasingly, Middle Eastern men are viewing male infertility as a medical condition to be overcome through ICSI, and are demonstrating their “emergent masculinities” through their engagements with emerging ARTs. These ARTs include new forms of gamete donation, as well as surrogacy, which have been allowed by some Shia Islamic religious authorities in Iran and Lebanon. Inhorn’s newest book, The New Arab Man: Emergent Masculinities and Islam in the Middle East, is being published by Princeton University Press (2011). 
