 Mark Waller (born 3 July 1957 in Northampton) is the former club doctor at Liverpool F.C. Waller first went to Liverpool in the 1970s as a medical student, soon becoming a Liverpool fan. Specialising in emergency medicine, he developed an interest in sports injuries. He was relieved of his duties in June 2010. He has since been appointed by former Liverpool F.C. manager Gérard Houllier as club doctor to Aston Villa F.C. Before joining Liverpool F.C as their doctor, he worked as a GP at Ford Medical Practice in Ford, Liverpool. He once saved a young footballers career (Ian Parker) by fixing a bad ingrowing toenail while at Ford Medical Centre. that propelled his career fore fold. He joined Liverpool F.C to oversee first team medical matters in 1993, but he is not a full-time employee of the club. He is responsible for the medical care of all the first team squad, including treatment and prevention of injuries. He is also doctor for the England Under-21 team and a FA representative on the British Olympic Association Medical Committee. He also lectures on sports injuries. Waller, with the then physio Dave Galley, both famously diagnosed the seriousness with Gérard Houllier's chest pains during the half time interval during the 2001 Liverpool game against Leeds United, which eventually led to an emergency operation on Houllier's heart. Houllier was giving a half-time team talk when he felt pains in his chest. Waller was treating striker Emile Heskey when Houllier asked for help. During the incident Houllier stated "Don't worry. He is worth more money than me, but I am more urgent". Waller took his blood pressure and immediately called an ambulance. Houllier was then transferred by ambulance to the accident and emergency department of Royal Liverpool University Hospital. Prompt recognition of the problem and emergency surgery probably saved Houllier's life. Waller was instrumental in overseeing the recovery of Djibril Cissé after the player sustained a broken leg during a match at Blackburn Rovers, an injury that could have cost Cissé his leg. Waller chose to "grab the leg and manipulate it", rather than spend "an hour or two getting to the hospital." He also oversaw Momo Sissoko's fast recovery from an eye injury following the Benfica Champions League away match in 2005. Waller refused to accept the initial expert diagnosis that Sissoko would never play again after the injury, despite the midfielder being "blind in his right eye for 36 hours." Sissoko was instead flown home the day after the match and placed under the care of the St Paul's eye unit in Royal Liverpool University Hospital. Waller has three children, Chris, Claire and Charlotte 
