 Mary Joy (styled as M@ry Joy) is the brand name of a distributor of legal intoxicants which are marked "strictly not for human consumption". Its products were launched in 2009 and include Pink and Annihilation (also known as K2, Warning, Review and Annihilator). The seller's products are legal intoxicants, some of which are named Pink, Evolution, Warning, Tornado and Annihilation. Pink and Annihilation are reported to be also known as K2, Warning, Review and Annihilator. A marketing slogan used in connection with the brand is "There's A New Clown In Town!!!". The seller has also been listed as an exporter of fumigation products for pest control. The seller's products were first launched in the UK in 2009, after a previous US launch. Its main market has been stated to be North America. The products are listed as not being legal in the Republic of Ireland. The products are marked labelled as "herbal incense" "not for human consumption" and are defined for legitimate sale as incense or pot pourri. Annihilation is smoked like cannabis as a psychoactive drug. An atomic bomb mushroom cloud in the shape of a clown's head is depicted on the packaging. Officers of Strathclyde Police issued a warning against general use, after nine hospitalisations in a three-month period. They also warned against mixing such products with other drugs or alcohol, remarking that "the consequences could be even more severe." Their usage within the UK is known to be prevalent in the Shetland Isles, and has also been noted in Glasgow, Lancashire and districts of Tyneside (including a 13-year-old) General effects reported by users are varying. They include "nothing much", "hallucinations and insomnia", "having heart palpitations... thought his skin was on fire" and "had a horrific time, I will not be trying it again". Adverse effects as warned by the police include "paranoia, aggression, increased heart rate, unconsciousness, self harming and numbness in the legs leading to users collapsing". Such effects have led to some users visiting A&E departments at hospitals including Lerwick's Gilbert Bain Hospital and the Royal Blackburn Hospital in Lancashire. Opposition to the labelling and sale of legal intoxicants such as Annihilation has been voiced by Graham Jones MP and Vera Baird QC. The review blog Herbal Incense Guide described the products as "joyous, giddy, relaxed fun" Its subsequent review of Warning noted its "slightly moist" herbs and "unfortunate surplus" of material but still regarded it as a "pleasing blend". A concluding comment in the review is "As wonderful as it is the show never lasts far beyond 30 minutes." 
