 Medical slang is a form of slang used by doctors, nurses, paramedics and other hospital or medical staff. Its central aspect is the use of acronyms and informal terminology to describe patients, co-workers or situations. In some cases this is done in a derogatory manner. Medical slang can be found in numerous languages but in English, in particular, it has entered popular culture via television hospital/forensic dramas such as Casualty, Holby City, ER, House M.D., NCIS, Scrubs and Green Wing. Medical slang comes in two forms: colloquial, but accepted, terminology used to describe medical professions, equipment, and diseases; and derogatory or pejorative language directed at fellow professionals and patients. Examples of the former include bagged and tagged for the intake process at a mortuary, blue pipes for veins, a champagne tap for a flawless lumbar puncture (this is cause for champagne to be taken in celebration), and a cabbage for a heart bypass (coronary artery bypass graft); examples of the latter include ATFO for asked to fuck off, bone break need fix for orthopaedic surgery, and donorcycle for motorcycle. In many countries, facetious or insulting acronyms are now considered unethical and unacceptable, and patients can access to their medical records. Medical facilities risk being sued by patients offended by the descriptions. Another reason for the decline is that facetious acronyms could be confused with genuine medical terms and the wrong treatment administered. In one of his annual reports (related by the BBC), medical slang collector Dr. Adam Fox cited an example where a practitioner had entered “TTFO”, meaning “told to fuck off”, on a patient’s chart. When questioned about the chart entry, the practitioner said that the initials stood for “to take fluids orally.” While this may or may not be true, it indicates the danger of using informal — and frequently insulting — acronyms. As a result, medical slang tends to be restricted to oral use and to informal notes or E-mails which do not form part of a patient’s formal records. It may also be used among medical staff outside of the hospital. It is not found on patients’ charts and, due to growing awareness of medical slang, often not used in front of patients themselves. Although online medical slang dictionaries are primarily from English-speaking countries, non-English medical slang has been collected by Fox from elsewhere. Brazilian medical slang includes PIMBA ("Pé Inchado Mulambo Bêbado Atropelado" meaning "swollen-footed, drunk, run-over beggar"), Poliesculhambado (multi-messed-up patient) and Trambiclínica (a "fraudulent clinic" staffed cheaply by medical students). There is an annual round-up of the usage of medical slang by British physician Dr. Adam Fox of St Mary's Hospital, London. Fox has spent five years charting more than 200 examples, regional and national terms and the general decline of medical slang. He believes that doctors have become more respectful of patients, which has contributed to the decline. While its use may be declining in the medical profession, several dictionaries of the slang have been compiled on the internet. 
