 Medical Neutrality refers to a principle of noninterference with medical services in times of armed conflict and civil unrest: physicians must be allowed to care for the sick and wounded, and soldiers must receive care regardless of their political affiliations; all parties must refrain from attacking and misusing medical facilities, transport, and personnel. Concepts comprising the principles of medical neutrality derive from international human rights law, medical ethics and humanitarian law. Medical neutrality may be thought of as a kind of social contract that obligates societies to protect medical personnel in both times of war and peace, and obligates medical personnel to treat all individuals regardless of religion, race, ethnicity, or political affiliation. Violations of medical neutrality constitute crimes outlined in the Geneva Conventions. The principle of medical neutrality has roots in many social traditions. Medical neutrality is violated when health care professionals, facilities, or patients come under attack, or when medical professionals are not allowed to provide treatment. Examples include: 2 October 2011 CONFIDENTIAL MYTH V. REALITY: SALMANIYA MEDICAL COMPLEX FROM FEBRUARY TO APRIL 2011 What follows is a non-paper, with accompanying materials, setting forth the results of our research on the events at Salmaniya Medical Complex. They are put at the disposal of the BICI in the hope that they may be useful. They do not necessarily reflect the views of any governmental agency of the Kingdom of Bahrain. I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1 II. STRUCTURE AND METHODOLOGY 2 III. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 3 IV. LEGAL AND ETHICAL FRAMEWORK 4 A. INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS LAW 4 B. DOMESTIC LAW 6 C. ETHICAL STANDARDS 7 V. ALLEGATIONS AND REPORTS 8 A. SUMMARY OF ALLEGATIONS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT 8 1. Allegations in Media and by Various Organizations 9 2. The PHR Report 9 VI. GOVERNMENT’S SECURING OF SALMANIYA WAS NECESSARY TO PROTECT THE RIGHT TO HEALTH 11 A. MYTH: GOVERNMENT’S SECURING OF SALMANIYA WAS IMPROPER 11 B. REALITY: GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION WAS BOTH NECESSARY AND PROPORTIONATE 11 1. Necessity 11 2. Proportionality 21 VII. PATIENTS AT SALMANIYA WERE NOT SYSTEMATICALLY ABUSED BY SECURITY FORCES 24 A. MYTH: SECURITY FORCES BEAT AND TORTURED PATIENTS ON THE SIXTH FLOOR IN NIGHTLY RAIDS 24 B. REALITY: NO EVIDENCE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST “CRISIS PATIENTS” ON SIXTH FLOOR BY SECURITY FORCES 24 C. REALITY: EVIDENCE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST SUNNI AND EXPATRIATE PATIENTS BY MEDICAL PERSONNEL AND PROTESTERS 28 VIII. AMBULANCES WERE NOT INSTRUCTED TO NEGLECT INJURED PROTESTERS 30 A. MYTH: AMBULANCES WERE ARBITRARILY OBSTRUCTED BY GOVERNMENT FORCES 30 B. REALITY: AMBULANCES DID TREAT INJURED PROTESTERS ON 17 FEBRUARY 30 C. REALITY: AFTER 17 FEBRUARY, SECURITY FORCES DID NOT ARBITRARILY PREVENT AMBULANCE WORKERS FROM TREATING PATIENTS 31 IX. CONCLUSION 34 I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1. Pursuant to Article 9(4) of Royal Decree No. 28, the BICI is asked to provide a “description of any acts of violence that have occurred including the nature of the acts, how they occurred, who the actors were and what consequences derived there from, in particular at the Salmaniya Hospital…”. 2. The BICI has no doubt been exposed to sensational media reports that medical personnel were arrested solely for having treated protesters. Examples of headlines include: “Bahrain puts medical staff on trial for treating injured protesters” (The Guardian) , “Bahrain doctors to be tried for helping protesters” (Boston Globe ) , and “Over 50 Bahrain Doctors on Charge Over Helping Protesters” (Ahlul Bayt). In reality, there are no charges for treating protesters, nor could there be under any law in Bahrain. The charges against the medical personnel relate to a number of serious crimes under Bahrain’s Penal Code, including the use of force to occupy a public building (Art 149), incitement of sectarian hatred (Arts 172), false imprisonment (art 357) and possession of illegal weapons (decree 16/1976). 3. The BICI has no doubt also been exposed to other widely circulated misinformation, primarily as a result of two reports prepared by Human Rights Watch and Physicians for Human Rights respectively. It is tempting to conclude at the outset that these well-meaning organizations could not have got it wrong. And yet, in fundamental respects, they did. 4. The PHR report contains the most outlandish claims: the suggestion that patients arrived at Salmaniya with symptoms of nerve gas, and that patients in Wards 62 and 63 of the hospital were repeatedly beaten and “tortured” in nightly raids by masked security forces in full view of hospital staff. In reality, those reports – as they themselves admit – are based on a set of (perhaps consistent, perhaps not) allegations by the alleged victims. No forensic or other evidence has been produced to support these suggestions. No member of the hospital management has been asked about them. And, even more crucially, no expatriate eyewitnesses – including the doctors and nurses on duty at the relevant times – have been asked to confirm or deny what happened in these wards. If they had, they would have told the authors, as they have told us, that nothing of the sort was happening. 5. This is not to say that all went smoothly at Salmaniya during the critical February-March period. Healthcare for people all over Bahrain was severely restricted. Patients at Salmaniya with serious conditions had to endure daily and nightly protests, speeches bellowing out over megaphones, and protesters blocking the hospital’s main car-park and Accident & Emergency entrance. Managers in certain parts of the hospital lost control of their functions, after the protesters formed a committee to take over. The hospital was literally under siege, with ambulances obstructed, persons being denied entry, and a number of weapons being stored in medical stock rooms. This led to a forced military takeover at the hospital to restore order and safeguard patient health. 6. This report attempts to disentangle three central misconceptions, so egregious as to merit the epithet “myths”, about what happened at Salmaniya earlier this year. 7. First, there is the myth that the army unjustifiably took over the hospital in order to identify and arrest patients. It is true that some patients, once discharged, were arrested while still on hospital grounds. But the reality is that the army had no choice but to bring in its forces in mid-March; the hospital had been taken over by protesters for almost a month, with Sunni patients being denied appropriate care and patients’ health being jeopardized. 8. Second, there is a myth that security forces beat and tortured patients during nightly visits post-takeover. The reality is that nurses and doctors who would have been eyewitnesses to any such event (or at least to the consequent injuries on patients that they were tending to daily) would be able to confirm this if it were true. They do not. 9. Third, there is a myth that ambulances were purposely prevented from providing medical care to protesters at various sites. Again, this is not borne out either by interviews with expatriate ambulance workers nor by the contemporaneous audio-recordings of staff operating the ambulance dispatch office. It is true that in a small number of cases, mostly on 17 February, ambulance workers claim they were attacked by police. Otherwise, interference was limited to checking that ambulances were not carrying weapons or were otherwise being misused. 10. Certain reporters publishing these myths were perhaps well intentioned. But that is no excuse for insufficient research or verification as a shortcut to headline-grabbing conclusions. These myths were profoundly prejudicial, and those who propagated them bear responsibility for exacerbating the tension and ill-feeling between communities in Bahrain. Salmaniya was in many ways the epicenter of the conflict in Bahrain and people deserve to know the truth about what happened there. II. STRUCTURE AND METHODOLOGY 11. The report is organized as follows. Section III sets out the factual background. Section IV describes the legal and ethical framework relevant to the events at Salmaniya, on both a domestic and international level. Section V summarizes allegations and reports that have been published in the wake of the events of February and March. Section VI explains the justification for the government’s takeover of Salmaniya on March 16, which is grounded in the protestors’ prior occupation of the hospital. Section VII responds to allegations that security forces attacked or tortured patients in the hospital following its securing of the hospital. Section VIII responds to allegations regarding the obstruction of ambulances. The two annexes present (i) a summary of allegations against the government (Annex 1) and (ii) a chronology of relevant events with hyperlinks to original documents (Annex 2). 12. The report is based primarily on first-hand interviews that have been conducted with Salmaniya administrative staff, doctors and nurses, as well as a review of contemporaneously recorded materials that have been made available by hospital staff and government officials. Where possible, the report has relied on the testimony of expatriates and others not aligned with any religious/political groupings in the events. 13. Contemporaneous materials include a police logbook that was created at the time that relevant events occurred by Ministry of Interior (MOI) staff. The log book is a record of every police-to-police communication over the radios and all calls to the police hotline by the public. Each entry to the log book is a summary of the relevant communication or call. The MOI’s media centre prepared the summary after having reviewed the communications. Other contemporaneous records that have been reviewed and referred to include audio-recordings of phone calls received by the ambulance dispatch centre at the hospital – either directly from members of the public or from ambulance drivers or police who received ‘999’ calls. Forensic reports prepared by Ministry of Interior forensic scientists detailing weapons discovered at the hospital have been reviewed. A printout of hospital records that were electronically saved at the relevant times has been used for statistics. And a large number of videos and photographs taken by eyewitnesses to the events in February-April are produced. 14. In order to fill in some details in the narrative, this report has also relied on witness statements that have been provided in the court case that has been brought against twenty medical personnel (Case 191/2011) before the National Safety Courts. The report has relied in this regard exclusively on non-confession material, in order to enhance guarantees of reliability. 15. These materials are indicated in the footnotes and are hyperlinked to this document for ease of reference. Further information about any of the sources, and the contact information of witnesses, is available on request. III. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 16. Salmaniya Medical Complex is the main public hospital in Bahrain. It is the largest cancer hospital in the country and one of the largest hospitals in the Gulf region. Situated in Bahrain’s capital, Manama, Salmaniya provides secondary and tertiary health care to all residents of Bahrain. It has almost 1000 beds, and covers all of the principal medical specialties including oncology, cardiology, nephrology, pediatrics and dialysis. It is the go-to medical facility for ambulances responding to emergency calls in the capital. It houses the country’s only blood bank, and provides emergency, outpatient and inpatient healthcare. The hospital also houses a teaching and research centre for healthcare professionals. 17. It is uncontroversial that approximately 70% of Salmaniya’s local staff is Shia. This is due to a number of factors. First, like most ministries in Bahrain, the Ministry of Health has a higher proportion of Shia employees than Sunni employees. Second, this proportion may be even higher than average at the Ministry of Health for cultural reasons. Many Shia students who go on to graduate-level education specialize in the professions, such as medicine, whereas many Sunnis prefer to go into business-focused jobs in the private sector. The result is that the majority of local medical staff at the hospital were of the same sect as the majority of protestors. 18. Out of 2,658 doctors and nurses (432 doctors and 2,226 nurses) who work at Salmaniya, 1,059 (140 doctors and 909 nurses) are expatriates – i.e. they do not carry Bahraini nationality. All of the expat nurses who were working at Salmaniya from 16 March to 30 April 2011 still work there. None resigned, retired, was suspended or dismissed or left for any other reason. Similarly, all expat doctors who were working at Salmaniya in February or March or April 2011 still work there. This means that all those who were spoken to for this report were working at the hospital at the time of the events – they are not newly-recruited staff or a subset of the original expat working population. IV. LEGAL AND ETHICAL FRAMEWORK A. International Human Rights Law 19. Under Article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), states parties, including Bahrain, “recognize the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health”. 20. The right to health is also protected under other international instruments to which Bahrain is a party. For instance, under Article 5 of the International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Racial Discrimination, “States Parties … guarantee the right of everyone, without distinction as to race, color, or national or ethnic origin, to equality before the law, notably in the enjoyment of … [t]he right to public health, medical care, social security and social services”. 21. The scope of Article 12 of the ICESCR, described by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights as “the most comprehensive article on the right to health in international human rights law,” is set out in the Committee’s General Comment No 14 (GC). 22. The GC highlights three practical aspects of the right: i. First, it includes the right to be free from interference, such as the right to be free from torture, non-consensual medical treatment and experimentation. ii. Second, it includes accessibility. Doctors must uphold medical neutrality, and health facilities, goods and services have to be accessible to everyone without discrimination on any prohibited grounds. iii. Third, it includes acceptability. All health facilities, goods and services must be respectful of medical ethics and culturally appropriate, i.e. “respectful of the culture of individuals, minorities, peoples and communities … as well as being designed to respect confidentiality and improve the health status of those concerned”. 23. The right to health, like all human rights, imposes three types of obligations on States parties: the obligations to respect, protect and fulfill. The obligation to respect requires States to refrain from interfering directly or indirectly with the enjoyment of the right to health by "refraining from denying or limiting equal access for all persons.” Examples of violations would include the denial of access to health facilities, goods and services to particular individuals or groups as a result of de jure or de facto discrimination. The obligation to protect requires States to take measures that prevent third parties from interfering with article 12 guarantees. Violations would include such omissions as the failure to regulate the activities of individuals, groups or corporations so as to prevent them from violating the right to health of others. Finally, the obligation to fulfill requires States to adopt appropriate legislative, administrative, budgetary, judicial, promotional and other measures towards the full realization of the right to health. B. Domestic Law 24. The right to health is enshrined in Article 8 of Bahrain’s Constitution, which provides that “[e]very citizen is entitled to health care. The State cares for public health and the State ensures the means of prevention and treatment by establishing a variety of hospitals and health care institutions”. 25. Medical professionals in Bahrain receive their licenses directly from the Ministry of Health as opposed to private medical societies. Doctors at Salmaniya therefore have specific duties that arise from their status as employees of the State. “Public jobs are a national service entrusted to their incumbent, and State employees shall have the public interest in mind when performing their jobs.” In addition, whoever has been licensed to practice medicine “shall carry out his duties with due accuracy and honesty, and shall maintain the integrity and honor of the profession.” Doctors may not submit a report that is not true. And “if civil servants … refuse to perform any of the duties of their offices either in agreement between themselves or seeking to achieve a common objective”, they are subject to criminal penalties, especially if “the relinquishment of duty or refusal to carry out such duty is likely to endanger public health or security.” 26. As in most jurisdictions, medical professionals also have a duty to report suspected crimes. This is provided for in specific laws as well as in the Criminal Procedure Code itself. This Code imposes a general duty to report and a duty specifically on doctors that “[e]veryone who has provided assistance in his ex officio medical practice in cases that give the appearance of the occurrence of a crime shall submit a report about it to the Public Prosecution or a judicial arrest officer within 24 hours from the date of providing such assistance”. 27. Finally, although Bahraini Law also protects the notion of freedom to assemble, associate and strike, this right – as in most jurisdictions – has time and place restrictions. This, as is commonly the case, includes the restriction that strikes are specifically prohibited “near hospitals”. C. Ethical Standards 28. Doctors, as medical professionals, have certain ethical obligations to provide unbiased care to those in need. 29. The World Medical Association (WMA) has an international code of medical ethics and medical ethics manual that describe the duties of doctors, including when administering emergency care. These instruments require medical professionals to practice medicine without regard to nationality, ethnicity, political affiliation or other social division. For instance, the WMA International Code of Medical Ethics 1949 provides that “[a] physician shall not allow his/her judgment to be influenced by personal profit or unfair discrimination”. 30. According to the WMA International Code of Medical Ethics, in addition to ethics governing his own conduct, a physician has an obligation to report to the appropriate authorities those physicians who practice unethically or engage in fraud or deception. 31. At the domestic level, the Bahrain Medical Society Charter of Ethics requires that doctors should maintain the medical profession as an ethical and scientific profession, respect human dignity in all circumstances and situations and be an example to others (art 2). 32. The Charter of Ethics also emphasizes the duty not to discriminate when dispensing treatment to patients, either by giving preferential or purposely sub-standard care. Articles 6-8 require that the doctor “should not be affected by the religious, sectarian, ethnic, or gender differences in terms of treating patients”, and “should respect the beliefs and religious and the social feelings of the patients”. Article 10 prescribes that the doctor should attempt to treat patients well whether in peace or war, for friends or enemies alike. The doctor is bound to respect the dignity of the patient and he is not allowed to insult him or cause him any moral or material harm (art 23). 33. In addition to impartiality, the ethical code also requires independence and professionalism. The doctor should never waive his independence, give an untrue diagnosis or write an unrealistic report, regardless of any external pressure (art 8). Doctors should also be polite and respectful with everyone, regardless of the circumstances (art 4), and should be familiar with the customs and traditions of the society in which he works so as not to cause offence (art 5). 34. Every doctor will also take an oath, known as the Hippocratic Oath, when they are licensed. For doctors licensed in Bahrain, the oath is: ‘In the name of God the merciful: “I swear by God […] to safeguard the life of humans in all cycles, circumstances and predicaments, and to exert all efforts to save the human life from destruction, sickness, pain, and anxiety; and […] to provide my medical care to everyone whether near or far, for the good and the faulty, for a friend and an enemy […]. God is my witness’. 35. The Bahraini ethics code makes clear that a doctor owes a duty of confidentiality to patients, unless it appears that a crime may have occurred (art 13). Finally, the Code makes clear that if a doctor violates the terms of the Code, he may be subject to legal procedures as provided by law (art 78). V. ALLEGATIONS AND REPORTS A. Summary of Allegations Against the Government 1. Allegations in Media and by Various Organizations 36. A number of allegations have been made by non-governmental organizations and media outlets against the government of Bahrain relating to the events at Salmaniya Medical Complex. The allegations fall into three main categories: (1) the occupation of Salmaniya Medical Complex by government forces in breach of its neutrality as a medical facility; (2) the use of medical facilities to arrest patients and the use of violence against patients at the hospital; and (3) the obstruction of medical care to injured protesters, including by obstructing ambulance workers. Many of these allegations are based – directly or indirectly - on the findings of Physicians for Human Rights, which produced a report suffering from serious methodological deficiencies (see section 2 below). 2. The PHR Report 37. There are a number of reports written by non-governmental organizations on Salmaniya. On their face, a number of them would appear to be credible – they are, after all, independent, third-party reports. However, in the case of Salmaniya, many of the reports that have been published copy or build on two inaccurate reports, or simply do not bother to provide an accurate and balanced perspective. 38. Ironically, the most misleading report is the one that might have been expected to be one of the most reliable: the report by Physicians for Human Rights published in April 2011 (the PHR Report). There are a number of serious allegations made in the PHR Report that have not been tested or questioned in the manner that might be expected prior to such an allegation being published. 39. Specific allegations from this report will be discussed below. More generally, however, the author’s report and ultimate conclusions suffer from methodological flaws and gaping omissions. 40. The PHR team spent just one week in Bahrain researching the events at Salmaniya. As the BICI will know, this is a very short time in which to attempt to understand a very complex set of events. The team only undertook its work during April 2011, rather than during the height of the events and allegations in February and March 2011. All 47 interviewees were kept anonymous. It appears that the PHR team only met with those who were sympathetic to the cause of the protesters and did not therefore speak to a representative sample of the relevant eyewitness population. Moreover, it appears that Mr. Richard Sollom, the author of the PHR report, used someone by the name of Maryam Khawaja as an interpreter. Ms Khawaja is a leading opposition figure and a member of one of the key opposition families who has frequently and publicly announced her hatred of the regime. The fact that all first-hand accounts were interpreted by her is, to say the least, questionable for an independent professional organization, and may have – directly or indirectly – tainted the “evidence”. 41. As for the gaping omissions, the allegations do not address the interference with medical neutrality by the protestors or rogue doctors from 14 February to 16 March 2011, focusing instead exclusively on alleged transgressions by the government from 16 March onwards. And yet it is certain – and documented in countless photos and videos that delegates have no doubt seen – that massive protests took place directly in front of the Accident and Emergency Department of Salmaniya. It is certain that protestors numbered in the thousands and assembled daily for almost a month (from 17 February) in front of Salmaniya. It is certain that tents and a stage were erected in the parking lot of the hospital where political speeches took place. It is certain that medical professionals themselves left their desks and theatres to protest in front of and inside the hospital. The hospital literally became a command centre of political activity. But none of this is mentioned in the PHR Report. While the focus of the report is understandably on government action, this action cannot be understood if presented in a vacuum, as if the story begins in mid-March. 42. Similarly, the report ignores the fact that inadequate care, and in some cases violence, was meted out by rogue Shia doctors to Sunni patients in the run-up to the army’s intervention. Again, this information provides essential context to explaining and evaluating the seizure of control of the hospital on 16 March by security forces. Nevertheless, it does not get a mention. 43. Such omissions are particularly perplexing in light of a report drafted by the same PHR author just one year earlier. Mr. Sollom published this PHR report in May 2010 about the unrest in Bangkok, Thailand, and the events at a certain hospital there. While there are of course some differences between the situations in Bahrain versus Bangkok, these are not of a nature that justifies the wildly different conclusions that are reached. 44. In the Bangkok context, the anti-government protestors had been accused of restricting access to the hospital by erecting bamboo poles and tires along certain roads and for having 20 protestors squatting in the hospital each night. The protestors are also accused of carrying weapons, inspecting vehicles, searching ambulances, and taunting and harassing hospital staff. The PHR Bangkok Report also refers to an occasion where a protestor, claiming to be a physician, demanded to have a medical record modified so it would appear as if the patient was injured from a fall as opposed to a blow to the face. Ultimately, the hospital was forced to evacuate patients. 45. There are striking similarities in Bahrain. The photos of Salmaniya show thousands of protestors assembled in front of the hospital, blocking its entrances. Weapons were found at various locations inside the hospital. An intern posed as a doctor on international television to explain his version of the events. There is at least one instance in which a patient’s medical file was falsified so as to read that she fell down some stairs, when in fact she had been injured by some protesters’ explosive device. And yet, whereas PHR criticizes the Thai anti-government protesters for their interference with the hospital and criticizes the Thai military for its failure to secure the hospital, when it comes to Bahrain it is just the opposite. VI. GOVERNMENT’S SECURING OF SALMANIYA WAS NECESSARY TO PROTECT THE RIGHT TO HEALTH A. Myth: Government’s Securing of Salmaniya was Improper 46. The government has been wrongly criticized for the way in which it restored security to the hospital. Specifically, the government has been criticized for entering the hospital violently, with tanks and heavy weaponry, forcing protesters to flee; disrupting medical services provided by the hospital; and for using their subsequent control of the hospital to arrest patients and medical staff on the premises. B. Reality: Government Intervention was Both Necessary and Proportionate 47. Bahrain is bound under the ICESCR to uphold the “right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health”. This means ensuring the accessibility of health facilities on a non-discriminatory basis. Bahrain is also obliged to take measures to prevent third-party interference with the guarantees enshrined in Article 12. 1. Necessity 48. From 14 February to 16 March 2011, the hospital underwent a tragic degeneration, in three phases. 49. First, from 14 to 19 February 2011, the hospital became a forum for mass protest. 50. During a second phase, from 19 February to 10 March, parts of Salmaniya were overrun, and ultimately managed, by protesters and medical personnel alike. Opposition figures often made politically-charged speeches from a stage erected in the hospital’s parking lot and doctors chanted slogans in the hospital corridors. The hospital was no longer a neutral institution, and patients’ medical needs apparently no longer its priority. 51. In a third and final phase, from 11 March to 15 March, Salmaniya degenerated further and took a violent turn. Rogue medical professionals (who were subsequently charged with crimes) and protesters abused patients, and held them against their will. Medical professionals also violated their obligation of medical neutrality by insulting certain patients and dispensing inadequate or abusive care. 52. During this entire period, the government showed restraint in the hope that things would go back to normal without confrontation. Although the hospital’s usual security guards remained, there was no police presence at Salmaniya in February or early March and no member of the Ministry of Interior or the BDF was dispatched to secure the hospital during this period. 53. But by mid-March, the situation had become intolerable. Such a long-lasting and institutionalized takeover of a country’s principal medical facility is unprecedented. The government had a duty to intervene to protect its residents’ right to health, and on 16 March, that is what it did. Calm was restored, and slowly, with medical standards reprioritized, more patients began to return to the hospital. Today, Salmaniya is again a functioning hospital dispensing professional medical care to all Bahrainis. a. Occupation and Politicization of the Hospital Phase 1 - Protests 54. Large groups of protesters first appeared at Salmaniya Medical Complex on 14 February 2011 – the day of the first protest. Between 14 and 17 February, crowds gathered at Salmaniya for the funeral processions of Ali Mushaima and Fadhel Matrouk, whose bodies had been at the hospital morgue. 55. After security forces cleared Pearl roundabout on 17 February, injured protesters were brought to Salmaniya, only 3km away, for treatment. Ayatollah Issa Qassem’s called worshipers to assemble at Salmaniya, and a large number of protesters marched towards the hospital, assembling in its parking lot. At its peak, the group reached 2500. One witness observed that doctors of all specialties, including dentists, rheumatologists and others, poured into the Emergency Room along with a number of patients whose injuries were not serious enough to merit their presence. The Emergency Room became chaotic, with a number of doctors unnecessarily crowding around these patients. A video showing the extent of the chaos is linked here. 56. Angered by a rumor – unfounded – that the Minister of Health had prevented ambulances from collecting protesters from the roundabout, a group of medical personnel stormed the hospital’s administration and verbally and physically attacked hospital administrators. The rumor had allegedly been started by Dr. Ali Ekri, and perpetuated by Dr. Jaleela Al A’ali. Dr. Ali Al Ekri subsequently organized an initiative to remove the Minister of Health. 57. Protesters, some of whom were armed, began chanting for the death or ousting of the King and the Minister of Health. This can be seen in the video linked here. A sit-in was organized in front of the hospital’s main entrance, during which time Ali Ekri shouted instructions and political messages from a loud speaker, as can be seen in the video linked here. Petitions were circulated within the hospital by those (primarily Shia doctors) who opposed the government, along with instructions that anyone who refused to sign them would be called a “traitor”. 58. By the day’s end, as can be seen in the photograph linked here, approximately 2500 people formed a loud mob, chanting and shouting across the car park in front of the hospital. Political speeches blared out over megaphones. From 17 February onwards, thousands of people who were previously stationed at the roundabout crowded the Accident and Emergency entrance daily, obstructing free entrance and intimidating bystanders who required medical attention. The entrance was effectively blockaded, and patients found it increasingly difficult to sleep. Phase 2 – The Takeover 59. According to a number of witnesses in Case 191, two days after the first protests took place at the hospital, on 19 February, a meeting took place on the third floor of Salmaniya Medical Complex during which Dr. Ali Al-Ekri organized a committee to manage certain key areas of the hospital. The meeting was arranged through a number of text messages sent amongst the medical professionals. Dr. Jassem, the head of Accident and Emergency, protested the plan, as he was supposed to be in charge of the emergency unit. It was formally agreed that he would remain in charge, but the plan was nevertheless set in motion. 60. The plan was to put in place a de facto committee to run a few key areas – key, in relation to the protests – within the hospital: the Emergency Department, Resuscitation Room, the main Operation Department, Orthopedic Surgery Department and General Surgery Department. During the meeting, the medics also discussed a strategy to force the dismissal of the Minister of Health, Faisal Al-Hamar, because of the suspicion that he had ordered ambulances to neglect injured protesters at Pearl roundabout on 17 February. A petition to this effect was circulated at the meeting, and medics were later pressured to sign it. 61. According to those present at the meeting, the following individuals were given responsibility for the following departments: i. Dr. Ali Al Ekri had overall responsibility over the group and, ultimately, security personnel and even ambulances derivers reported to him; ii. Dr. Qasem Omran and Mahmoud Asghar were assigned responsibility for organizing a media campaign to disseminate false news on the number of injuries in order to gain international sympathy and support; iii. Dr. Bassam Dheif was assigned responsibility for the operation room and was to prepare the operation room for the injured protesters; iv. Dr. Qasim Mirza Ashour was assigned to be the Emergency Department Official; and v. Drs Hassan Al Thoplani and Nihad Al Shirawi were assigned responsibility as the intensive care officials. 62. Dr. Jassem Al Mehza, who was normally in charge of the Accident and Emergency Department, admits to having lost the authority to fully carry out his functions from this time. Another witness, Dr. Israa Sami Mohammad Salman, a surgeon at Salmaniya, observed: The management was no longer in control. The hospital was not run normally. Nobody could get in or out of the hospital without the approval of protesters asking to topple the regime. Not all doctors were fulfilling their duties, as everyone used to gather in the emergency room, whether a specialized emergency doctor or not. Surgeries were cancelled at the time because doctors were busy with the events. 63. There was no medical reason for this coup d’état. The move was political. The creation of a media committee in itself makes this clear. From that point forward, certain areas of the hospital were no longer being run according to the professional structure and hierarchy. 64. Under the direction of Dr. Ali Al Ekri, five tents were erected in the parking lot of Salmaniya Medical Complex. One tent was erected for drinks, another for food, one tent aired television broadcasts, another distributed publications, and the last had photographs of the injured protesters. 65. A number of opposition members and political figures made speeches from a stage in the parking lot of Salmaniya, including: Mohammed Al Miqdad; Ibrahim Sherif; Hassan Mushaima, Abdul-Jalil Khalil and Abdulwahab Hussein. In one such speech, the speaker announces in front of Salmaniya’s Accident and Emergency entrance that “this is now our establishment and we have to protect it in any way possible” (linked). In another video, Ali Ekri can be heard celebrating that “the doctors and medical personnel adopted the 14th of Feb movement with this statement” (linked). 66. The media played an integral role in the exaggeration of injuries and fatalities, some unwittingly and others by design. During the course of the unrest, representatives of a number of different news agencies were seen inside the hospital, including JDN, PressTV, Le Monde, Al Jazeera, Al-Manar, BBC, and CNN. The media was given access to operating theatres, an environment that is usually required to be private, not to mention sterile. All of this overcrowded the hospital, was contrary to medical professionals’ duties towards their patients and seriously jeopardized medical care. 67. The media representatives were among a number of unauthorized visitors to these critical parts of the hospital. TV crews filmed dermatologists and neo-natal specialists who have no trauma surgery experience purport to discuss the workings of the emergency department. Patients with minor injuries also entered the emergency room, creating further confusion as to the actual number of genuinely injured protesters. 68. Grossly inflated or unverified statistics started to appear in media reports from unauthorized sources, fomenting further unrest in Bahrain. For instance, on 17 February, Ahlul Bayt News Agency reported that up to 3000 patients had been admitted to Salmaniya Medical Complex. In reality, contemporaneous electronic hospital records show that 113 crisis-patients received treatment at the hospital that day, and only 38 crisis patients were admitted to stay overnight at Salmaniya. 69. The medical professionals working within Salmaniya were the driving force behind the exaggerated statistics. For example, Dr. Ghassan Dheif (a defendant in Case 191) routinely exaggerated the state of affairs in his interviews. On 18 February, Al Jazeera English published an interview with Dr. Ghassan Dheif who said the following: The hospital is full of casualties…there are victims thrown in the road…it is chaos here in the hospital…they were on their way to the hospital, and they were shot dead, we have a lot of deaths here, I cannot describe the situation, it’s awful, its awful, that is the way we can describe it, its chaos, the hospital is full of casualties all the medical staff is running on their feet…it is quite difficult to accommodate all of these casualties, the hospital is nearly full…we’ve taken all patients to the theatre… the ICU, the accident and emergency is full of casualties, it is an unbelievable scene, it is indescribable, it is barbaric. [In response to question regarding number of deaths:] It is uncountable my friend, it is uncountable…it is very difficult to count the number of casualties…we can’t even identify them, because they don’t even hold their IDs, they were thrown on the road…it is very hard to describe the situation…as if we are in a war… 70. Not a single person died on 18 February, and only 9 crisis patients were admitted to Salmaniya to stay overnight. 71. A number of news agencies also aired footage of doctors claiming that a number of patients had arrived at Salmaniya on 11 and 13 March suffering from symptoms of nerve-gas inhalation. Consequently, the government has been condemned for the use of such a lethal, toxic weapon. Despite the numerous reports, these claims are completely unsupported by evidence. Moreover, a number of doctors interviewed for this report have explained that had nerve-gas been used by security forces, the death toll would have been far greater - and security forces would have been wearing masks - given the lethal results of its inhalation. 72. Other rumors circulated during this time included an allegation on Press TV that the government had hidden dead protesters in refrigerators, which is false. A story emerged that Salmaniya Medical Complex was bursting at the seams with patients due to the unrest. In reality, 209 crisis patients were admitted in the whole month between 14 February and 16 March, 50% of whom were discharged within 3 days and many hospital beds were empty. It was also said that people were dying at the hospital because it had run out of blood for transfusions, a claim that the person in charge of the Salmaniya blood bank has confirmed is false. 73. The inaccurate reporting by news agencies continued throughout the course of the unrest, and by the time the government intervened on 16 March, all the hospital’s televisions screens had been tuned to Iranian channels. Phase 3 – Violence and Discriminatory Mistreatment 74. In parallel with these events, Drs. Ekri and Dheif, among others, launched a vicious campaign against Sunni doctors at the hospital. Sunni doctors were informed that their names were circulated on a "list of shame" at the roundabout and on Twitter. These lists were also circulated to the Sunni doctors and amongst their colleagues through text-messaging and chat programs. Their photos were posted on the wall of the hospital to brand them as traitors to the protesters' cause. One Sunni doctor received a bullet in the post and others received threatening e-mails. Dr. Wael Mohammed of Salmaniya preserved a tweet, which according to him has since been removed from Twitter, which read: “your humiliation is approaching when we will drag you with ropes to the airport ourselves like dogs, or to prison, and we will work hard and soon to attain punishment, and it will only be a matter of days.” 75. During this period of the occupation of Salmaniya by the protesters and rogue medical staff, the standard of medical care provided to Sunni and expatriate patients dropped dramatically, and even involved violence and racist abuse. The most shocking example relates to the treatment received by a group of 17 South Asian expatriates who arrived to the hospital on 13 March 2011. This example is set out in detail in paragraph 105-109 below. Other examples include: Example 1: Salih Mash’an Meshlih 76. Salih Mash’an Meshlih – a Syrian national working for the police – was attacked on 15 March 2011 by a group of protesters while in civilian clothes and incurred severe head trauma. The patient was brought to Pearl roundabout before arriving at Salmaniya. 77. At Salmaniya, he was spat on and verbally and physically abused, including while he received a CT scan. Despite his serious wounds, he was given late and only basic first-aid treatment. One of the medical doctors (Dr. Ghassan Dheif) tried to prevent his transfer to BDF Hospital, calling him a “thug” (“baltaje”). Instead, the patient was admitted to ward 65 – a room controlled by protestors. Hospital administrators Dr. Waleed Al Manea and Mohammed Abdulrahim Abdulla eventually succeeded in transferring him to BDF hospital by taking him through the maternity ward. The patient is still unable to return to duty. Example 2: Student from University of Bahrain 78. A Sunni student, Muadh Ahmed Nadhani (aged 20), was attacked in the violence at Bahrain University on 13 March and brought to Salmaniya Medical Complex where he was intimidated, threatened and verbally abused by medical staff and protesters alike. After receiving surgery, the patient was exposed to photographers from Press TV and was left in a room with four or five individuals (who were protesters) standing guard outside his room. After becoming aware of this, the hospital administration managed to sneak the patient out to BDF Hospital. Example 3: Ismail Rawther 79. An Indian laborer, Ismail Rawther, has described how he and others were insulted when they arrived at the hospital. As Ismail speaks Arabic, he understood a protester shouting to the ambulance driver “why have you brought one of these people here?”. He entered the hospital and received basic treatment, but was told by an Indian nurse that it was not safe for him to receive additional treatment as other South Asian patients had been attacked at Salmaniya earlier that day. As a result, Mr. Rawther and his acquaintances left for BDF. Example 4: Filipina Bystander 80. One expatriate at Salmaniya also had her medical records altered. Riza Sorino Etruma, a Filipina, was injured by an explosion during an attack by protesters on South Asian expatriates on 15 March 2011 as she walked home from work. The maxillo-facial surgeon that attended to her – Dr. Oday Ali Al Haddad – noted on her medical form that her injury was caused by a “slip from stairs”, though he was well aware of the circumstances of her injury. She complained to the medical staff at Salmaniya and eventually was examined by Dr. Khalil Ebrahim Jawad, a Salmaniya doctor specializing in oral and maxilla-facial surgery. As a result, she has finally managed to get her medical report corrected to reflect the true cause of her injury. b. Taking Stock: The End of the Occupation 81. As might be expected, the health care that was provided, both inside and outside the hospital, was seriously disrupted during the period leading up to 16 March. 82. According to statistics provided by Salmaniya Medical Complex, the hospital received 24,622 patients in February 2010 and 28,409 patients in March 2010. Over the course of the unrest in 2011, the number of patients that visited Salmaniya decreased to 20,250 in February and just 14,265 in March, a drop of over 10,000 patients from the preceding year. Salmaniya’s outpatient clinics were cancelled on various days during this time as well, and elective admissions were reduced dramatically. Figure 1: Patients Admitted to Salmaniya Medical Complex in 2010 and 2011 2. Proportionality a. 16 March: A Peaceful Takeover 83. Security forces took measures to restore order to Salmaniya Medical Complex on 16 March. Given the escalating chaos and violence at the hospital, these measures were not only necessary but also proportionate. 84. An action plan was developed for a team from the Bahrain Defense Force, in collaboration with the Ministry of Interior, to secure the hospital. The plan was based on the following orders: i. Maintain the security and safety of citizens and residents. ii. Remove all tents and cars of the protesters within the vicinity of the hospital, especially in front of the emergency entrance. iii. Set up checkpoints to facilitate the entry of patients and visitors. 85. Following this plan, the hospital was secured as follows: i. At around 7:15am on 16 March, security forces surrounded the hospital. As a result, some bystanders and protesters rushed inside and spread out within the hospital. Visitors and staff-members had to exit and re-enter the hospital, passing through checkpoints with metal detectors where all individuals identified themselves. However, injured people continued to arrive at and access the hospital. ii. No shots were fired, and no injuries were sustained. iii. At approximately 4pm, Shaikh Mohammed bin Abdullah, a Minister from the Prime Minister’s office, announced over the public address system that he was giving all those individuals who should not be in the hospital (i.e. any remaining protesters) the opportunity to vacate the premises. Some took the opportunity to do so. iv. Nevertheless, security forces searched the hospital and discovered: (a) a group of protesters disguised in patients’ gowns hiding on the 5th floor of the hospital; (b) a group of protesters disguised as doctors hiding on the 3rd floor of the hospital; (c) a group of protesters who possessed weapons in the hospital; and (d) some media personnel videotaping and broadcasting media material on the 6th floor of the hospital. v. They also found a large stock of weapons. A full list of the weapons found is available in the case file for Case 191; forensic reports prepared by Ministry of Interior experts also detail these findings and a video showing the discovery of the weapons is linked here. In total, three different searches within the hospital resulted in the discovery of weapons, including two rifles (AK47 Kalashnikov), magazines and bullets (found at other locations in the hospital complex, 20 Molotov cocktails (found in the ambulance parking lot); and swords and knives (the latter found in the morgue and wrapped in a white cloth in an office ceiling). vi. Later, to maintain safety in SMC, security forces set up checkpoints and asked all those entering the hospital for their identification and reason for visit. According to medical workers, this heavy screening lasted about one week. The checkpoints were as follows: • Gate (1) was operating around the clock and was assigned to the visitors of Al-Faeth Center and visiting residents, as well as staff. • Gate (4) was operating around the clock and was assigned to visiting residents, as well as students of the Faculty of Health Sciences. • Gate (5) was assigned to emergencies, accidents and staff of the Gulf University and visiting residents. • Gate (6) was used by the staff and some visitors to the administration. Access to all gates was provided through ordinary security procedures and at no point was anyone – whether a patient, visitor, employee, or student – denied access to the hospital by government forces or following their order. vii. Finally, as part of the strategy to secure the hospital, all crisis patients injured during the course of the protests were moved into wards on the sixth floor for extra protection, and presumably also to facilitate the arrests of some upon their discharge. Security forces reduced access to this floor to a minimum and provided extra guards for the wards. 86. Expatriate nurses from the sixth floor explain that the increased security measures allowed them to feel safe in going to and from work at the hospital. They also report that the security forces present did not interfere in the medical attention provided to patients. Nor did these nurses witness suspected or actual violence against any patients in the hospital. Staff in other parts of the hospital also confirmed that the security forces were not violent in restoring security, did not brandish nor threaten people with weapons and took control of the hospital in a peaceful manner. 87. Under these circumstances, the conduct of the security forces was proportionate to the need to restore order to the hospital. Indeed, a government’s duty to protect the right to health – as PHR reminds us in the Bangkok context – could not allow the situation to deteriorate to the point where patients at the country’s main public hospital would have to be evacuated. VII. PATIENTS AT SALMANIYA WERE NOT SYSTEMATICALLY ABUSED BY SECURITY FORCES A. Myth: Security Forces Beat and Tortured Patients on the Sixth Floor in Nightly Raids 88. Another myth that has circulated about Salmaniya in the media and NGO reports is that crisis patients – injured protesters – on the sixth floor were being beaten and dragged through corridors. Specifically, the reports allege that between 18 and 20 March, patients in Ward 62 were beaten and tortured by security forces during the night, and that thereafter on undetermined dates in March or April, patients in Ward 63 were beaten during nightly visits by armed men. Gruesome details in the reports include allegations that the patients were beaten with the butts of the policemen's rifles, received kicks of the groin and stomach and were forced to make confessions. 89. The PHR report also alleges that, according to its sources, up to 800 patients had been arbitrarily detained or disappeared. Similarly, HRW implies that some patients were suspiciously moved to other hospitals since some were returned with more serious injuries than they had previously sustained. B. Reality: No Evidence of Violence Against “Crisis Patients” on Sixth Floor by Security Forces 90. Despite the extraordinary and extremely serious nature of these claims, it appears that the authors of these reports did not speak to a single hospital administrator; that they did not speak to a single neutral witness, such as expatriate nurses who were working on the night shift in the wards on the days that the alleged events occurred; and that they did not speak to a single expatriate doctor who treated these patients and saw them on a daily basis. 91. Expatriate nurses and doctors who worked on the 6th floor and have been interviewed for this report have affirmed that: i. they had full view of patients whenever there was a military presence in the ward; ii. they did not observe any violence against any of the patients; iii. they did not observe any deterioration of health or any injuries consistent with the use of such violence; and iv. none of the patients told them that security forces had been aggressive with them at any time. The Allegedly Suspicious Transfer of Patients from Salmaniya 92. According to hospital records, approximately 20 crisis patients were transferred from Salmaniya to BDF Hospital during the end of March and early April. Four of them were subsequently re-admitted to Salmaniya. 93. In each case, there was a medical reason for the transfer – a need for follow-up surgery in areas such as thoracic surgery, neurosurgery, general surgery, eye surgery, and maxillo-facial surgery, in some cases due to a shortage of practitioners at Salmaniya. 94. It is true that the majority of these patients were suspected of criminal activity and ultimately arrested. However, their transfers were not a coordinated arrest campaign: many were arrested weeks after their transfer and some up to three months following their transfer to BDF Hospital, as records obtained from the Ministry of Interior confirm. Moreover, only four of these patients were ever re-admitted to Salmaniya, and there is no evidence from their medical records that their condition had deteriorated. Claims of Violence on Ward 62 on 18-20 March 2011 95. The allegations about Ward 62 are serious and specific – that between 18 and 20 March patients were brutally beaten in nightly raids by guards, and these patients were then transferred to Ward 63. We have interviewed three expatriate nurses from Ward 62, who were the full complement of expatriate nursing staff on the nights of 18 and 19 March when the alleged abuse occurred. All three nurses are from India. They were continuously in the ward (between them) day and night. They witnessed neither beatings nor torture. Nor did they see or hear about any injuries that could have been attributable to physical abuse while at the hospital. The nurses were not approached by newspapers or human rights organizations reporting on SMC. They have asked not to be named in this report but their contact information can be provided directly to the Commission. Claims of Violence in Ward 63 in March and April 2011 96. It is no exaggeration to say that reports describe Ward 63 as a torture chamber. It makes for nauseating reading: claims of beatings while patients lie in their beds, and blood-soaked bodies being dragged on the floor. But these are rumors and allegations. The actual facts are as follows: i. Between 15 March and 30 April, a total of 27 patients were treated in Ward 63. ii. These patients were treated by two expatriate doctors, Dr. Rajasekaran Nair and Dr. Praveen Gupta. iii. The patients were also treated by a total of 16 expat nurses who were assigned to this ward, all of whom worked the night shift at least once during this time. 97. Two of these night-shift nurses are from India. They have asked not to be named in this report but their contact information can be provided directly to the Commission. They confirmed that they dealt with all the patients in that ward on a nightly basis (or occasionally during the day) during this time in which it is said extreme violence occurred. 98. Both nurses explained that there were about 20 patients in Ward 63 at any one time. They confirmed that security forces regularly entered the hospital, sometimes at night, to check on the patients in this ward room-to-room. The nurses recall them being masked. The nurses usually accompanied the security forces on these “rounds”, or otherwise had their patients within view and earshot, and never witnessed any violence. The nurses came to know the patients well. None of the patients mentioned having been mistreated. Nor did the nurses, who would perform regular checks on the patients, notice any unusual bruises or deterioration in the patients’ condition following the checks. 99. Neither of these nurses – nor, as far as they know, any of their expat colleagues – has been approached by any human rights group or journalist with questions. 100. Dr. Praveen Gupta, a consultant neurosurgeon, is one of only two expatriate (Indian) doctors who treated crisis patients in Ward 63 during March and April. Dr. Gupta confirmed that, while he was not in the wards as often as the nursing staff, he never noticed anything untoward in treating any of these patients, nor any unexplained aggravation in their medical condition. 101. Dr. Gupta has never been approached by any human rights group or journalist with questions. Conclusion 102. The reality, then, is that there were no nighttime torture sessions at this hospital. 103. In addition, contrary to further allegations in the PHR and HRW reports, none of the expatriate personnel from Salmaniya interviewed for this report ever witnessed attacks or violence against medical personnel at the hospital. C. Reality: Evidence of Violence Against Sunni and Expatriate Patients By Medical Personnel and Protesters 104. Unlike the mythical torture chamber on the sixth floor, real violence was meted out to Sunni expatriate patients as part of a discriminatory campaign within the hospital. According to some witnesses, it became commonplace for doctors at Salmaniya to refuse to give adequate medical attention to Sunni patients. The government had a duty to investigate and prosecute these abuses, and a number of criminal prosecutions followed as a result. 105. One shocking example recalled by several eyewitnesses involves the treatment of a group of South Asian laborers who had been badly beaten the night of 13 March 2011. According to the evidence, between 8pm and 9:30 pm, 17 South Asian nationals arrived at Salmaniya as patients. Hospital records confirm their names, CPRs and nationalities. One eyewitness stated that three of the patients arrived at the hospital with their hands tied, in the personal car of opposition political figure, Muhammad Al-Miqdad. Some of the patients had come from Pearl roundabout where they had been paraded as prisoners. 106. A publicly available video records the arrival of three South Asian patients who had been transported in one ambulance. The ambulance arrived at the hospital to a crowd of protesters and medical personnel, all chanting aggressively. The first patient was removed from the ambulance to the sound of clapping from the crowd, even though he was bruised and bloody, and clearly in pain. He was then violently thrown on to a stretcher with his hands tied in front of him. The next two patients were removed from the ambulance with their hands tied behind their backs. In what is now an infamous video, the first of these two patients can be seen escorted by Dr. Ghassan Dheif and was taken firmly by the scruff of his neck. The second was escorted by another medical professional who also grabbed the patient by his neck. 107. Another of these victims, a Pakistani laborer named Mushtaq Khan Muammad Zahid was attacked on the night of 14 March 2011 and provided a written and video-recorded statement describing his ordeal. Upon arriving at Salmaniya, Mr. Zahid was told that, given that he is Pakistani, he would not be treated at the hospital. Doctors and a number of people at the hospital repeatedly spat on him. He, along with other Pakistani patients, were then placed in hospital beds and photographed. He was told that although he had walked into the hospital alive, he would leave dead. He was able to get to the BDF hospital. 108. Witnesses then observed mistreatment of other patients from this group inside the hospital: i. Witness Dr. Abdul-Aziz Mohammed Matawa’a, a doctor from Salmaniya Medical Complex, observed medics allowing protesters at the hospital to spit on the patients as they arrived; ii. Witnesses Dr. Shreef Khashabah, a surgeon at Salmaniya, and Dr. Khurram Moktar, a doctor working in Salmaniya’s emergency room, observed medical professionals refusing to comply with a request from a doctor to perform a CT scan on one patient and a chest x-ray for another. The two witnesses also observed the interrogation of the patients by a number of medics who were convinced that the expatriate patients had been hired by the Ministry of the Interior to kill Shias; iii. Witness Dr. Shreef Khashabah observed two doctors insisting that a third doctor treat the patients while their hands were still tied. Dr. Khashabah then saw beating of the patients inside the hospital, and heard certain medical professionals refer to the patients as “dogs”; and iv. Dr. Ghassan Dhaif was heard yelling something along the lines of “kick these mercenaries out and let the military treat them” through the corridors of Salmaniya hospital. 109. In response, Salmaniya’s Chief Executive Officer Dr. Waleed Al Manea – though unsuccessful at first – managed to sneak the patients out of Salmaniya to the BDF hospital. 110. It should be mentioned that, according to some eyewitnesses such as ambulance staff, some arrests were carried out in the hospital and on occasion security forces were “a bit rough” when carrying these out, for instance by grabbing a suspect by his clothes. These incidents may have been reported to human rights groups but are a far cry from what was published in their reports. VIII. AMBULANCES WERE NOT INSTRUCTED TO NEGLECT INJURED PROTESTERS A. Myth: Ambulances were Arbitrarily Obstructed by Government Forces 111. There is a third major myth about what happened at Salmaniya: that ambulances were deliberately obstructed in their duties so as to stop them from treating protesters. In reality, ambulances lost their neutral status early on in the events, as they were stolen, filled with unauthorized persons and sometimes even carried weapons. This led security forces to search them before allowing them to enter protest sites. B. Reality: Ambulances Did Treat Injured Protesters on 17 February 112. A central myth is that on 17 February, as of 6:30 a.m. the Minister of Health prohibited ambulances from attending to injured protesters still at the roundabout. 113. In reality, contemporaneously audio-recorded conversations with the ambulance-dispatch office at Salmaniya reveal that at 6.46 a.m., ambulance 13736 called the dispatch room and reported that all the injured protesters had been collected from Pearl roundabout, so that there was no need for further ambulances to be dispatched. In the words of the caller, “all the injured patients have been removed”. And between 6.30am-9am, no patients from Pearl roundabout arrived at the A&E Department of SMC in taxis or in private vehicles. 114. Nevertheless the protesters, including medical personnel who had congregated at Salmaniya, marched aggressively towards the administration offices, alleging that the Minister of Health had prevented ambulances from picking up injured protesters from Pearl roundabout. Eyewitnesses report that the rioters attacked, both verbally and physically, Dr. Waleed Al Manea, the Chief Executive Officer of SMC, and Dr. Abdulha, the undersecretary of the Ministry of Health for this reason. The assistant undersecretary of hospitals, Dr. Amin Al Saati, and Dr. Al Manea, were also locked in a room and threatened. 115. Out of an abundance of caution, Salmaniya administrators sent an ambulance to the roundabout at about 8am to further inspect and search for wounded protestors. Dr. Ali Al-Ekri and others who had been demanding this accompanied the ambulance staff. But they returned without any patients. At around 11.15am, due to continue insistence in some circles that there may be further casualties at Pearl roundabout, yet another SMC ambulance was dispatched to Pearl roundabout. But again, no casualties were found. C. Reality: After 17 February, Security Forces Did Not Arbitrarily Prevent Ambulance Workers from Treating Patients 116. During the crisis period between 17 February and the end of April, ambulances were routinely dispatched to treat injured persons. 117. An expat ambulance worker from the Philippines who worked at Salmaniya during the crisis period, and described himself as being sympathetic to the political views of the protesters, confirmed that he and his colleagues did not experience violent attacks or obstruction in reaching injured protesters. Nor were he or his colleagues prevented from administering treatment. He did say that he had heard of a few isolated incidents where the Bahraini driver of an ambulance was told to move or was reprimanded for not having followed applicable laws and protocols by calling the police to a potential crime scene. He had heard of a few ambulance workers being attacked on the 17th February. But there was no pattern of physical attacks or obstruction of medical assistance; rather, police sometimes “harassed” ambulance workers who were called to Sunni areas by checking the contents of the ambulance before allowing them to proceed to their destination. 118. The government’s suspicion of ambulance misuse was well grounded. One troubling example took place on 13 March, the day that protesters wrongfully entered the Bahrain University campus in an ambulance filled with protesters and a store of weapons. One of these ambulances can be seen in the photograph here. By the end of 13 March, four Sunni students were in intensive care. 119. The vehicles would not have been allowed in to the campus, but the security did not stop the ambulances, thinking that they contained medical personnel. After this, ambulances were seen not as neutral, but a key tool in sectarian violence. 120. In another incident, an ambulance was reportedly used to run over a policeman. 121. Ambulances were also misused in a string of other incidents throughout the conflict, including: i. on 17 February, a protestor who had gathered at SMC stole an ambulance and drove it to the Al Hawaj building where clashes between security personnel and rioters had taken place; ii. between 17 February and 13 March, ambulances sometimes received instructions outside the ordinary chain of command; for instance directly from protesters or from individual rogue doctors; they would arrive at sites without having responded to a formal call and would break protocol by not alerting police to a crime scene; iii. protesters used up to six ambulances as part of a small motorcade during protest marches, as can be seen here; iv. protesters threw rocks at and attacked an ambulance, forcing the staff from the ambulance to flee and leaving the ambulance vulnerable to being taken over by the protesters, as can be seen here; v. on 13 March, an ambulance was used to transport three South Asian nationals to Salmaniya as prisoners, with their hands tied in front of them, as can be seen here; vi. also on 13 March, rogue medical staff at Salmaniya apparently used ambulances to distribute weapons from the hospital to the rioters at various protest sites and provided ambulance staff with the same; and vii. on 15 March, the police received two reports that ambulances from Salmaniya had been used for improper purposes: in the first instance for the transportation of hostages to Pearl roundabout, and in the second instance for the transportation of armed individuals to protest sites. 122. Given the numerous instances of unauthorized ambulance misuse, it was important for the security forces occasionally to check ambulances in order to satisfy themselves that the ambulances were safe to treat patients. In addition, to ensure (a) the safety of the ambulances; and (b) that the ambulances are used for proper purposes, police escorts often accompanied ambulances from 16 March onwards. Finally, in some cases, security forces moved ambulance workers away from the immediate crime scene zone to an outer zone for their own protection, in line with international disaster protocol. 123. As with the mid-March takeover of the hospital by the BDF, the government had a duty to take control and stop abuses from taking place. There were objective reasons for suspicions to be cast on the neutrality of ambulances as early as 17 February. This situation worsened, culminating in the use of an ambulance to trigger the bloodshed at Bahrain University and in other attacks. Security forces had to respond to this reality. Apart from isolated incidents where it is claimed that certain ambulance workers were beaten on 17 February, this response was non-violent – it was to stop and search ambulances to ensure they were being used for legitimate medical purposes, or move them a short distance for their own protection. Most importantly, there is no evidence that any such government intervention interfered with the quality or timeliness of health care for any patients. IX. CONCLUSION 124. What happened at Salmaniya? The answer, for many a contemporaneous observer, evokes a confused and concerned frown. It is the Commission's task to dispel the myths and assess what conclusions are supportable by credible evidence. 125. This report has not attempted to compare tit-for-tat allegations on both sides. Rather, it has taken the most serious allegations leveled against the government – and exposed them as myths. The government did not arbitrarily order the invasion of the medical centre – they brought security forces in to reestablish order, and had a duty to do so. Security forces did not beat and torture patients in their beds; the violence that actually occurred in the hospital was caused by rogue doctors against Sunni expatriate workers. And ambulances were not ordered to leave patients lying in the road. There is simply no evidence to support such claims, and a good deal of evidence undermining them. 126. Mistakes undoubtedly were made by the government, for example in arresting persons in or around Salmaniya and mistreating a few ambulance drivers. But these mistakes do not approach the horrific allegations of human rights abuses that have been leveled, which -- no matter how many times they are repeated and in whose name -- remain mere rumors and unfounded allegations. 127. We trust the Commission will find, when it clears the smoke, that what remains is the tragedy of a hospital under siege, a population in fear and a medical profession disgraced. During the Battle of Grozny in 1996 during the First Chechen War, several hospitals were attacked. Municipal Hospital No. 9 was invaded by Russian soldiers and approximately 500 civilians were taken hostage. The ICRC Hospital of Novye Atagi, which was created to symbolize medical neutrality in the war torn area, was ambushed and resulted in the killing of six members of the ICRC staff. In 2011, during political unrest, state security forces directly attacked protestors and field clinics, injuring and killing numerous people. A state security officer even dressed himself as a doctor and administered fatal shots to those injured in a field clinic outside of Tahrir Square. Medical supplies were confiscated by “military officers and field hospital tents were burned down during a Tahrir raid.” In the Salvadoran Civil War, many field clinics were attacked by guerillas. Patients were commonly abducted from hospitals, and government forces greatly limited the movements of health workers. Medical transports were also attacked, in some cases resulting in the deaths of medical workers. In June 2008, Iranian authorities detained Dr. Arash Alaei and Dr. Kamiar Alaei, two well-known Iranian physicians and leaders in the fight against HIV/AIDS. The physicians, who are brothers, were held in Tehran’s notorious Evin prison for over six months without being charged or tried. On December 31, 2008, a one-day, closed-door trial was held, in which the brothers were tried as conspirators working with an “enemy government” to overthrow the government of Iran. They were also tried at that time on unspecified other charges which neither they nor their lawyer were allowed to know, see the evidence of, or address. They were charged with attempting to overthrow the Iranian government under article 508 of Iran’s Islamic Penal Code. Kamiar was sentenced to three years in prison and Arash to six. The government of Iran used the brothers’ travels to international AIDS conferences as the basis for these claims. The international community decried the sentences of the doctors, and Physicians for Human Rights launched a campaign for their release. In 2010, Dr. Kamiar Alaei was freed after serving two years in prison. Dr. Arash Alaei was released in August 2011 after more than three years of detention. Since their release, the doctors have reunited in the United States, where they continue their medical and advocacy work. During the 2011 Libyan civil war, human rights groups documented violations of medical neutrality along with many other gross violations of human rights. Physicians for Human Rights conducted investigations within Libya in 2011, and found that the military had attacked and destroyed hospitals. Several eyewitnesses reported that Gaddafi forces attacked ambulances carrying injured combatants, despite the fact that the ambulances were marked with the emblematic Red Crescent. Medical personnel were kidnapped by Gaddafi’s forces, and military forces used people as human shields. During the Mozambican Civil War, the resistance group RENAMO was responsible for many violations of medical neutrality. Attacks on hospitals and health clinics were common. In one instance, RENAMO soldiers raided the town of Homoine, killing 442 civilians including hospitalized patients. Civil unrest and demonstrations began in Panama in June of 1987. During the unrest, human rights groups such as Physicians for Human Rights documented a variety of human rights abuses and violations of medical neutrality. The military blocked access to hospitals and interfered with provision of medical care, took control of ambulance services for military purposes, and interrogated wounded patients. In addition, Panamanian physicians were kidnapped, beaten, and tortured for speaking out against government policies which prevented them from providing their patients with adequate care. Sri Lanka’s lengthy civil war was marked by extensive human rights abuses. In 2009, the Sri Lankan air force violated the principle of medical neutrality when it destroyed the Ponnampalam Memorial Hospital in Puthukkudiyiruppu. The Syrian civil war has been marked by widespread human rights abuses, including violations of medical neutrality. Government forces have invaded, attacked, and misused hospitals and medical transports, preventing civilians from receiving health care. An estimated 250 doctors have been detained and tortured for treating wounded civilians. An investigation by Physicians for Human Rights revealed that these circumstances have led to the rise of an underground health network. A year after a bloodless military coup in Bangkok in February 1991, the new government responded to the pro-democracy movement opening fire on a May opposition rally, resulting in 52 deaths, hundreds of injured, and many disappearances. Physicians for Human Rights reported that health professionals were prevented from reaching the wounded and the police shot at ambulances. The Medical Neutrality Protection Act of 2011, (H.R. 2643), is a bipartisan bill introduced by Representatives Jim McDermott (D-WA), and Walter B. Jones, Jr. (R-NC) that intends to make the protection of medical professionals and access to medical services a global policy priority for the US government. 
