 Mehmet Cengiz Oz (; [meh-met jhengis oz]; born June 11, 1960), also known as Dr. Oz, is an American-Turkish cardiothoracic surgeon, author, and television personality. Oz first appeared on the The Oprah Winfrey Show in 2004, and later on Larry King Live and other TV programs. In 2009, The Dr. Oz Show, a daily television program focusing on medical issues and personal health was launched by Winfrey's Harpo Productions and Sony Pictures. Oz was born in Cleveland, Ohio, to Suna and Mustafa Öz, who had emigrated from Konya Province, Turkey. Mustafa Öz was born in Bozkır, a small town in central Turkey. Mustafa Öz earned scholarships that allowed him to emigrate to the United States as a medical resident in 1955. Suna Öz (née Atabay), who comes from a wealthy İstanbul family, is the daughter of a pharmacist with Shapsug descent on her mother's side. Oz was educated at Tower Hill School in Wilmington, Delaware. In 1982 he received his undergraduate degree from Harvard University. In 1986 he obtained a joint MD and MBA degree from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and The Wharton School. He was awarded the Captain’s Athletic Award for leadership in college and was class president and then student body president during medical school. Oz has been a professor at the Department of Surgery at Columbia University since 2001. He directs the Cardiovascular Institute and Complementary Medicine Program at New York-Presbyterian Hospital. His research interests include heart replacement surgery, minimally invasive cardiac surgery, and health care policy. With his collaborators, he has authored over 400 research papers, book chapters and medical books and has received several patents. Oz is the founder and chairman of HealthCorps, a non-profit organization that pays a small stipend to recent college graduates to spend two years in high schools mentoring students about health, nutrition, and fitness. In 2009, Oz joined Jeffrey T. Arnold (founder of WebMD) as co-founder of Sharecare, Inc., providing an interactive QA platform that allows industry experts to answer health-related questions. Dr Oz described his philosophy to The New Yorker: “I want no more barriers between patient and medicine. I would take us all back a thousand years, when our ancestors lived in small villages and there was always a healer in that village.” Oz appeared as a health expert on The Oprah Winfrey Show for five seasons. On the show, he addressed issues like Type 2 diabetes and promoted resveratrol supplements, which he claimed were anti-aging. His Transplant! television series won both a Freddie and a Silver Telly award. He has appeared on Good Morning America, the Today show, Larry King Live and The View, as well as guest-hosting the Charlie Rose show. In addition, he served as medical director of Denzel Washington’s John Q. He currently hosts The Dr. Oz Show on television and a talk show on Sirius XM Radio. In January 2011, Oz premiered as part of a weekly show on the Oprah Winfrey Network called "Oprah's Allstars". In each episode, he, Suze Orman and Dr. Phil answer various questions about life, health and finance. Oz co-authored, with Michael F. Roizen, six New York Times best sellers including You: The Owner’s Manual, You: The Smart Patient,You: On a Diet, You: Staying Young, You: Being Beautiful as well as Healing from the Heart. His book You: Having a Baby was published by Free Press in 2009. He has a regular column in Esquire magazine and O, The Oprah Magazine and his article “Retool, Reboot, and Rebuild” was awarded the 2009 National Magazine Award for Personal Service. Time magazine ranked Oz at 44th on its list of the "100 Most Influential People in 2008" and Esquire magazine placed him on its list of the "75 Most Influential People of the 21st Century". He was called a Global Leader of Tomorrow by the World Economic Forum and one of “The Harvard 100 Most Influential Alumni” by 02138 magazine. He won the Gross Surgical Research Scholarship. He was listed in “Doctors of the Year” by Hippocrates magazine and in “Healers of the Millennium” by Healthy Living magazine. Oz is annually listed in the Castle Connolly Guide of the top United States doctors, as well as other ranking groups. Other awards and honors include: Oz lives in Cliffside Park, New Jersey with his wife Lisa. They have been married since 1985 and have four children. His eldest daughter is author and television host Daphne Oz. Oz is fluent in both English and Turkish. He is a holder of both Turkish and American citizenship, having served in the Turkish Army to retain his Turkish citizenship. He grew up in a mixed Muslim environment where his father's family were conservatives who believed in the integration of Islam and government, while his mother's family were more secular Muslims. He has been influenced by the mysticism of Sufi Muslims, as well as the ideas of Emanuel Swedenborg, the Swedish scientist, philosopher, and Christian theologian. He recently wrote in Spirituality and Health Magazine that "As I came into contact with Swedenborg's many writings, I began to understand Swedenborg's profound insights and how they applied directly to my life". He mentions Swedenborg's ideas that marriage lasts to eternity, everyone has a purpose in this world, God is love, and Swedenborg's answers to "Why do bad things happen?". Oz is a practitioner of Transcendental Meditation. "When I meditate, I go to that place where truth lives," he said. "I can see what reality really is, and it is so much easier to form good relationships then." In August 2010, Oz was diagnosed with a pre-cancerous polyp in the colon during a routine colonoscopy which was performed as part of his show. Oz said that the procedure likely saved his life. Oz has faced criticism in the past due to his tendency to feature pseudoscience and other controversial subjects. In September 2011, Oz drew criticism for a show focusing on the dangers of arsenic in apple juice. Oz hired an independent toxicology laboratory, EMSL, and found arsenic levels in some samples to be above the limit U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) allows in drinking water. A school district took apple juice off its menu after the show. The FDA said "there is currently no evidence to suggest a public health risk". Further testing conducted by Consumer Reports however, confirmed the findings of Dr Oz that inorganic arsenic levels were indeed above the levels allowed by the FDA for drinking water. Oz is a spokesman and advisor for the website RealAge.com, which The New York Times has criticized for its pharmaceutical marketing practices. The site solicits medical information from visitors to determine a visitor’s biological age and then uses the visitor's medical profile for pharmaceutical marketing purposes. As The Times reporter explained the significance of this fact: "While few people would fill out a detailed questionnaire about their health and hand it over to a drug company looking for suggestions for new medications, that is essentially what RealAge is doing." An episode of The Dr. Oz Show that aired on November 28, 2012, was devoted to the "reparative therapy". Advocates of this practice view homosexuality as an illness or mental health problem that can be "cured", even though homosexuality does not appear in any of the current medical diagnostic manuals for illness or mental health conditions, such as DSM-IV-TR. On the contrary, in response to "reparative therapy" advocacy, several mainstream medical and psychological organizations formed the "Just the Facts Coalition", and published a booklet explicitly opposing "reparative therapy" because, in the medical opinion of these organizations, homosexuality is not an illness. Thus, this episode of Dr. Oz presented information in direct conflict with the opinions of the American Psychological Association, American Psychiatric Association, American Academy of Pediatrics, and others. The broadcast featured a representative of NARTH (The National Association for Research and Therapy of Homosexuality), Julie Hamilton, PhD. Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender (LGBT) advocacy groups strongly condemned Oz for allowing anyone who defended reparative therapy to appear on his program. Oz wrote on his blog that he "felt they needed to include all parties [in a discussion]" but agreed with established medical consensus that the data does not support any positive results. The statements by Oz seemed to do little to appease members of the LGBT community. 
