 Membership of the Royal College of Surgeons MRCS is a professional qualification for surgeons in the UK and Ireland. This qualification should not be confused with the old M.R.C.S. which was paired with the L.R.C.P. to form the Conjoint diploma, a now defunct initial qualification in medicine. In the United Kingdom, doctors who gain this qualification traditionally no longer use the title 'Dr' but start to use the title 'Mr', 'Mrs', 'Miss' or 'Ms'. There are 4 surgical colleges in the UK & Ireland: Each college used to hold examinations independently, but latterly to a common syllabus. However, in January 2004, the four colleges switched over to a common examination, known as the Intercollegiate MRCS. The separate qualifications used to be Fellowships (F.R.C.S.), but a new set of higher fellowships in specialised fields such as orthopaedics, urology, etc., has been set up to be taken at the end of Higher Surgical Training: this is now the Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons. The new M.R.C.S. was originally decided to be taken at the end of Basic Surgical Training. More recently Foundation Program doctors have been allowed to take certain parts of the examination. In response to demand from overseas practitioners the colleges have begun to hold some of their examinations abroad. Attaining the M.R.C.S. does not give the doctor a right to practise as a surgeon. It is a diploma that is required to progress to Higher specialist training and only attaining an F.R.C.S. in the required speciality along with a C.C.T. (certificate of completion of training) makes the doctor eligible to practise as a surgical consultant in his or her respective field. In the United Kingdom, success in MRCS examination is required for the career progression of trainee surgeons. A large and varied collection of commercial revision resources are available that are designed to improve a candidate's chance of success. These resources include courses, books, online question banks and mobile applications 
