 Miami-Dade Fire Rescue Department (MDFR) is the combined fire and emergency services department for Miami-Dade County, Florida. Its headquarters are in Doral. Organized in 1935 as a single-unit “fire patrol,” MDFR has grown into one of the top ten largest fire-rescue departments in the United States with an annual operating budget of more than $418 million and a $148 million multi-year capital plan. MDFR is staffed by more than 2,550 employees; of which, more than 2,000 are uniformed firefighters. MDFR has 66 fire-rescue stations within unincorporated Miami-Dade County and the 30 municipalities it serves: Aventura, Bal Harbour, Bay Harbor Islands, Biscayne Park, Cutler Bay, Doral, El Portal, Florida City, Golden Beach, Hialeah Gardens, Homestead, Hammocks, Indian Creek, Islandia, Medley, Miami Gardens, Miami Lakes, Miami Shores, Miami Springs, North Bay Village, North Miami, North Miami Beach, Opa-locka, Palmetto Bay, Pinecrest, South Miami, Sunny Isles Beach, Surfside, Sweetwater, Virginia Gardens, West Kendall, and West Miami. MDFR also provides aero-medical transport services within Miami-Dade County to state approved trauma centers and other medical facilities. MDFR’s 4 air rescue helicopters are also used to perform search and rescue missions, and firefighting and reconnaissance operations involving large incidents, such as wildfires and major alarms. The Department also provides fire protection services for Miami International Airport, Kendall-Tamiami Executive Airport and Opa-Locka Airport. MDFR’s Special Operations Division includes response units dedicated to air rescue transports, ocean rescue lifeguards, rescue divers, marine fire and rescue operations, and the Florida Anti-Venom Bank. The Domestic Preparedness Division oversees the operations of Hazardous Materials (HazMat), Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) and Technical Rescue (TRT) teams. Throughout the territory it serves, MDFR operates 132 rescue, suppression, and specialty units 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year, providing emergency rescue aid to more than 1.7 million residents and visitors. During fiscal year 2007-2008, MDFR responded to approximately 233,000 emergencies, more than 75 percent of which were medical in nature. MDFR’s air rescue helicopters flew more than 1,600 missions during the same fiscal year, increasing the survivability of approximately 1,600 patients in critical emergencies. MDFR is split into two command areas. North and south. The north territory covers the suburbs on the Miami-Dade/Broward County line to as far south as Medely . The south territory covers the area of just north of Nw 12th St to as far south as the Miami-Dade/Monroe County line. Everyday MDFR serves the businesses and residents of Miami-Dade County,Florida. The department serves unincorporated areas and various municipalities in the area. 
