 In 1985, Barth A. Green, M.D. and NFL Hall of Fame linebacker Nick Buoniconti helped found The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis after Nick’s son, Marc, sustained a spinal cord injury during a college football game. Today, The Miami Project is the world’s most comprehensive spinal cord injury research center and a designated Center of Excellence at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine. The Miami Project’s international team is housed in the Lois Pope LIFE Center and includes more than 250 scientists, researchers and clinicians who take innovative approaches to the challenge of spinal cord injury The Miami Project’s Christine E. Lynn Human Clinical Trials Initiative will take discoveries found to be successful in laboratory studies and fast track them to human studies with the approval of the FDA. The Miami Project is well positioned and confident that we have the expertise, knowledge and drive to navigate through the process and continue to initiate new human clinical trials. Since its inception, The Miami Project has worked carefully and diligently towards these goals and the results show that the time is right to make these important steps into humans. Committed to finding a cure for paralysis resulting from spinal cord injury and to seeing millions worldwide walk again, the Buoniconti family established The Buoniconti Fund to Cure Paralysis in 1992, a non-profit organization devoted to assisting The Miami Project achieve its national and international goals. The Center is located in the Schoninger research quadrangle at the University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Medical Center. It was named in honor of Lois Pope, who donated $10 million toward its construction, and of her charity Leaders in Furthering Education (LIFE). The building opened on October 26, 2000. Pope's gift also funds 20 LIFE Fellows for neurological research. The six-story building cost $28 million and was designed by MGE Architects. The block of NW 11th Avenue in front of the building has been named Buoniconti Drive. 
