 Michael D. Lockshin, M.D., is an American professor and medical researcher. He is a researcher of autoimmune diseases, with focus on antiphospholipid syndrome and lupus. He is currently Professor of Medicine and Obstetrics-Gynecology at the Weill-Cornell University Medical College in New York City. Locksin's twin brother, Richard A. Lockshin, is an American cellular biologist known for his work on apoptosis. Lockshin graduated cum laude from Harvard College with an BA in history and literature. He received his MD from Harvard Medical School. Lockshin interned and did his residency at Bellevue Hospital and Memorial Hospital for Cancer and Allied Diseases and his fellowship in Rheumatic Diseases at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York City. His long-term research interest is in the clinical aspects of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), pregnancy in rheumatic disease patients, gender and rheumatic disease, and neurological SLE. His research has been supported by grants from NIAMS, the Arthritis Foundation, the SLE Foundation, and private donors throughout his academic career. He is director of the Barbara Volcker Center for Women and Rheumatic Disease and co-director of the Mary Kirkland Center for Lupus Research at the Hospital for Special Surgery. Locksin served as editor-in-chief of Arthritis & Rheumatism for five years. He has also served on the editorial board of the Journal of Rheumatology, and as a reviewer for the New England Journal of Medicine, the Journal of Clinical Investigation, and the Journal of Immunology. Lockshin has held senior management positions at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. He served first as director of the Extramural Program of the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS) and then as acting director of the Institute. This Institute is responsible for U.S. government research funding in the fields of rheumatology and dermatology. He also served as Senior Advisor to the Director at the NIH's Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center. Lockshin received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the New York Arthritis Foundation in 2008. He was named a master of the American College of Rheumatology in 2003 and a Research Hero of the Arthritis Foundation in 2001. He is an honorary faculty member of Alpha Omega Alpha. He has served on numerous study sections and ad-hoc committees for the National Institutes of Health, the Veterans' Administration, the Canadian Arthritis and Rheumatism Society, the Canadian Medical Research Council, the SLE Foundation, among others. RELEVANT PEER-REVIEWED PUBLICATIONS (selected 2005–present, of 200+ total, includes reviews) 
