 Dr. Michael Glyn Brown (born 1957) is a former hand surgeon from Greater Houston, Texas. Brown is the owner of the Brown Hand Center. Craig Malislow of the Houston Press said that Brown has been "long a fixture of Houston TV commercials and society." Brown was born in Galena Park, Texas. In middle school he saw a film of Michael DeBakey performing heart surgery. He wanted to be a heart surgeon, but he said that he ultimately became a hand surgeon because the practice allowed for greater creativity and was "more challenging." In 1975 he graduated from Galena Park High School with honors. For his undergraduate studies he attended the Southwest Texas State University (now Texas State University–San Marcos), where he received a grade point average of 3.97. He then attended and graduated from the Baylor College of Medicine. He received his medical license in 1983. Brown did surgical training in a hospital in Stockton, California. In 1988 he founded the Brown Hand Center. Until a time before 2002, Brown made $2.5 million annually from his business. He had a residence in the East Wedgwood Glen of The Woodlands. He also had a mansion in the Memorial area of Houston. Todd Ackerman of the Houston Chronicle said that Brown's popularity as a hand surgeon was often attributed to the "patented Brown technique" of carpal tunnel surgery, an endoscopic surgery for the wrist. The Brown Hand Center advertisements and website credited him with inventing the technique. The materials contrast the Brown technique with more traditional surgery, which requires stitches. Dr. Robert Szabo, the president of the American Society for Surgery of the Hand and the chief hand surgeon of the University of California-Davis School of Medicine, said that Brown's business has "nothing unique" "in regards to the surgeries they perform or helping hand patients generally." Ackerman said that Szabo and other orthopedic surgeons say that Brown's claim to a special technique is based on the fact that he patented his own surgical instruments. They said that Brown's instruments are very similar to instruments used by other hand surgeons. In Houston Brown was well known for starring in television advertisements that show him with Sophie, his baby daughter. Ackerman said that Brown "made a lucrative business by portraying himself as a medical pioneer dedicated to principles of family, compassion and kindness" and that he had a "family-man image". Ackerman added that "But in reality, he appears possessed by personal demons — drugs, sex, violence — that have threatened his professional career and destroyed his family life." In 2002 the Texas Medical Board placed Brown on probation due to "concerns he had an alcohol or chemical dependency" and for beating Darlina Barone, his third wife. In 2002 he had been charged with and convicted of beating her. In 2006, after Brown tested positive for cocaine, the Texas Medical Board revoked his license to practice medicine. In 2008 Brown received the Republican Congressional Medal of Distinction. As part of the award he had a dinner with President of the United States George W. Bush and a lunch with Vice President of the United States Dick Cheney. In 2010 he threw the first pitch at a Houston Astros game. Ackerman said that the marital and drug use controversies did not "put a damper on Brown's favor among the powerful." In September, 2011, after a week long trial, Brown was acquitted of felony assault of Rachael Brown, his fourth wife. As of 2010 the Brown Hand Center has locations in Houston, Dallas, Austin, Las Vegas, and Phoenix. In 2010 Ackerman said "For all of Brown's troubles, his business continues to thrive." One of Barone's divorce attorneys said in September 2010 that his businesses were expected to gross about $45 million in a 12 month period afterwards. Tommy Fibich, a law attorney, said that the projected figure is higher than the $15 and $30 million annual grosses that the business had in approximately five years. As of 2010 the Brown Hand Center advertising promotes Brown's medical background and mentions that he has a medical degree, but Ackerman said that the advertisements "stop short of identifying him as a practicing doctor" The advertisements say that Brown trained the doctors who work at the clinic and had been "retired." Seth Chandler, a University of Houston professor of law, assessed whether the advertisements violate the Texas Medical Practice Act. Chandler concluded that "It's a close call. The ads are misleading, but I don't see a slam dunk for anyone looking to prosecute." 
