 Microcephaly is a neurodevelopmental disorder. It is an important neurologic sign but there is nonuniformity in the definition of microcephaly. It is usually defined as a head circumference (HC) more than 2 standard deviation below the mean for age and gender. Some academics advocate defining it as head circumference more than 3 standard deviation below the mean for the age and sex. Microcephaly may be congenital or it may develop in the first few years of life. The disorder may stem from a wide variety of conditions that cause abnormal growth of the brain, or from syndromes associated with chromosomal abnormalities. A homozygous mutation in one of the microcephalin genes causes primary microcephaly. In general, life expectancy for individuals with microcephaly is reduced and the prognosis for normal brain function is poor. The prognosis varies depending on the presence of associated abnormalities. Microcephaly is a type of cephalic disorder. It has been classified in two types based on the onset: 1. Congenital Isolated Syndromes Acquired Other 2. Postnatal onset Genetic Syndromes Acquired A genetic factor may play a role in causing some cases of microcephaly. Relations have been found between autism, duplications of chromosomes and macrocephaly on one side. On the other side a relation has been found between schizophrenia, deletions of chromosomes and microcephaly. "Microcephaly" means "small head" (literal translation from the Greek "μικρό κεφάλι"). "Microencephaly" means "small brain". Because the size of the head is mostly determined by the size of the brain, microencephaly is implied when discussing microcephaly. After the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, several women close to ground zero who had been pregnant at the time gave birth to children with microcephaly. Microcephaly prevalence was 7 out of a group of 11 pregnant women at 11–17 weeks of gestation who survived the blast at less than 1.2 km from ground zero. Due to their proximity to the bomb, the pregnant women's in utero children received a biologically significant radiation dosage that was relatively high due to the massive neutron output of the lower explosive-yielding Little Boy. Microcephaly is the only proven malformation, or congenital abnormality, found in the children of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Affected newborns generally have striking neurological defects and seizures. Severely impaired intellectual development is common, but disturbances in motor functions may not appear until later in life. Infants with microcephaly are born with either a normal or reduced head size. Subsequently the head fails to grow while the face continues to develop at a normal rate, producing a child with a small head and a receding forehead, and a loose, often wrinkled scalp. As the child grows older, the smallness of the skull becomes more obvious, although the entire body also is often underweight and dwarfed. Development of motor functions and speech may be delayed. Hyperactivity and Intellectual Disability are common occurrences, although the degree of each varies. Convulsions may also occur. Motor ability varies, ranging from clumsiness in some to spastic quadriplegia in others. Generally there is no specific treatment for microcephaly. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Microcephalics were sometimes sold to freak shows in North America and Europe in the 19th and early 20th century, where they were known by the name "pinheads". Many of them were presented as different species (e.g., "monkey man") and described as being the missing link. Famous examples are Zip the Pinhead (although he may not have had microcephaly) and Schlitzie the Pinhead, who also starred in the 1932 movie Freaks. Both these individuals were cited as influences on the development of the long-running comic strip character Zippy the Pinhead, created by Bill Griffith. 
