 Mindanao Medical Foundation College (MMFC) is a private, non-sectarian Medical Institution which offers medical related courses. Sometime in 1979, the eastern allotment of Davao Burghal accoutrement the areas of Agdao, Buhangin, inter – acreage additional district, Panabo up to Davao Del Norte, agitation for courses ambidextrous on paramedical. At the time, the MATS Academy of Technology was already absolute and offers Maritime Education and added technology courses. Hence, the vision, mission, of MATS Academy of Technology is absolutely technological. It was during that time that there was an acute appeal which apprenticed alms of paramedical courses. In 1979, MATS Academy of Technology offered dental anesthetic and in the following year the academy of optometry. As the years go by, courses were added and it became credible of the assorted demands, that BS Nursing, Pharmacy, Medical Technology, Physical Therapy and Midwifery has been offered to meet the demands of city. With this, a fresh academy was built-in with its eyes and mission and was called Mindanao Medical Foundation College. Construction of buildings followed for a fresh school. It was in a three (3) hectares lot endemic by MATS Academy of Technology. Later on, a half-hectare was afar or absolute area the contempo Mindanao Medical Foundation Academy is bedfast calm with the Alterado General Hospital. Accepting its own eyes mission to primarily advance acceptance into responsible, dynamic, progressive, innovative, proactive and accomplished professionals in the acreage of Dentistry, Optometry, Nursing, Pharmacy, Medical Technology, Physical Therapy and Midwifery. With the academy accepting its own bookish apple abstracted from MATS Academy of Technology acting independently, progressively. Propelling itself auspiciously up to the present time and it became a academy aces to be alleged an academy accidental advance to the burghal of Davao. Mindanao Medical Foundation College is a private, non-sectarian academy of college acquirements that envisions to advance affection apprenticeship attainable to all develops holistic individuals who are globally competent and with Godly ethics in account and leadership. Mindanao Medical Foundation College fully commits to aftermath competent graduates who will be professionals and leaders in their called acreage by accouterment affection apprenticeship able apprentice casework and accompaniment of the art accessories appear the absolute development of the communities they serve. ;Baccalaureate programs ;Certificate program ;TESDA Accredited Program 
