 Motorcycle ambulances are a type of emergency vehicle which either carries a solo paramedic or first responder to a patient; or is used with a trailer or sidecar for transporting patients. A motorcycle ambulance is able to respond to a medical emergency much faster than a car or van in heavy traffic, which can increase survival rates for patients suffering cardiac arrest. Motorcycle ambulances were used during World War I by the British, French and Americans. At the time the advantages of light weight, speed, and mobility over larger vehicles was cited as the motive for the use of sidedcar rigs in this role. The US version had two stretchers arranged one on top of the other. The French ambulance used a sidecar that held a single patient, who could either lie down or sit up. The British Red Cross Society used an NUT motorcycle with a double decker sidecar like the US version. During testing it needed only a turning area, versus for a motor car ambulance, and had a lower fuel consumption of , compared with for car ambulances. Due to lighter weight they were said to be less likely to get stuck and could be pushed out more easily than a large vehicle. Sidecar ambulances were used in Redondo Beach, California in 1915, stationed at a bath house at a beach resort to reach drowning victims quickly. Prior to using the motorcycle, life guards had to run or row up to several miles along the beach to respond to calls. The Knightsbridge Animal Hospital and Institute, London, was using a sidecar ambulance to transport dogs in 1912, and this mode was still in use in 1937 by the Maryland Humane Society. Since 2000, the São Paulo Fire Department has operated Honda motorcycle ambulances (, known as "MOBs") in a first responder role, to offset the influence of traffic on the response times of traditional ambulances. The motorcycles carry a variety of emergency care equipment (including basic extrication, technical rescue, and firefighting gear) and are always deployed in two-man teams, with the lead vehicle carrying a first aid kit and intravenous fluids and the rear vehicle carrying more advanced equipment, including an automated external defibrillator, suction devices, and emergency delivery kits. Fire departments in other states, such as Minas Gerais, Mato Grosso do Sul and Pernambuco, have also adopted motorcycle ambulances since 2008. In August 2008, SAMU, the federal emergency medical services, purchased 400 motorcycle ambulances to be deployed nationwide between December 2008 and 2009. The Bavarian Red Cross has operated motorcycle ambulances since 1983. As of 2011 they report a fleet of 25 motorcycles and 100 volunteer paramedics. According to the book Rescue Mission which is written by an Emergency Medical Assistant of Hong Kong Fire Services Department, the H.K.F.S.D. established the first motorcycle programme in 1982. At first, there are only two motorcycles stationed in Morrison Hill Ambulance Depot. In 1986, the H.K.F.S.D. found that motorcycles are useful for responding medical calls, so they bought seven more motorcycles in 1987. In 1989, the motorcycle team had 15 motorcycles and stationed in several ambulance depots. Today, the H.K.F.S.D. has 35 motorcycles. Auxiliary Medical Service, another government-owned service, also has motorcycles. In some areas of Japan. Japanese fire departments use off-road motorcycles as emergency vehicles. They are useful for negotiating the small streets and heavy traffic in the large urban areas of Japanese cities. Having off-road motorcycles helps in responding to the mountain hills that are around a lot of cities. Some departments would likely have their crews in teams of two or three motorcycles. One of the motorcycles carries a first aid kit and/or automated external defibrillator. The other motorcycles in this team may carry fire fighting and rescue equipment. Most crews are firefighters with training in first responder, First Aid, and/or paramedic. Each crew member wears a light weight fire suit and a fire fighting motorcycle helmet. A lot of these motorcycles have their own radio, cargo bays, lights and sirens. As part of the United Kingdom's Department for International Development (DFID) wider £50 million country programme (2009), they are putting in place among other things a new motorcycle ambulance service. The Magunga's Health Centre now operates a motorcycle (sidecar) ambulance service. Sarah Brown, Global Patron of the White Ribbon Alliance for Safe Motherhood said: They have been used in remote rural areas in Malawi as a means to improve access to obstetric health care facilities for women in labor or needing prenatal care. Lightweight off-road motorcycles, equipped with a sidecar holding a stretcher for the patient, have been found to be an efficient supplement, but not replacement for, 4-wheel drive SUV ambulances. Purchase prices and operating costs have been found to be a fraction of a four-wheeled vehicle, and the sidecar rigs have been found to be less likely to be misused by diverting them for non-healthcare purposes. The lighter sidecar rigs are better able to cope with poor roads and areas that become impassible to heavier cars and trucks during the rainy season. Disadvantages include the reluctance of drivers to travel at night in some cases, and the inability to carry more than one patient at a time. The report concluded that: The Emergency Medical Service in Belgrade introduced a Suzuki V-Strom 650 in 2011, with the crew consisting of a motocyclist and a doctor. Panniers and a top-box contain equipment for CPR, bandaging, anti-shock therapy, paramedic and other equipment. In March 2009, through a partnership between UNICEF and the Government of Southern Sudan, a lifeline was extended to some pregnant women with the introduction of five motorcycle ambulances in the state of Eastern Equatoria. The UNICEF Annual Report 2009 concluded that: Since the start of the UNICEF pilot study additional motorcycle ambulances have been delivered to the region using a Not On Our Watch Awards Grant to U.S. Fund for UNICEF with the aim of Reducing Maternal Mortality Rates in Southern Sudan. Motorcycles are used as rapid response vehicles by NHS emergency medical services and St John Ambulance in the United Kingdom. St John Ambulance Wales have introduced three motorbikes after a successful trial. With a Honda Transalp based in Newtown, a BMW R1200RT based in the centre of Cardiff, along with a BMW F650 which covers the South Wales Area. The bikes will be used primarily as an initial response at road races, cycle races and other major events where it would be difficult to move ambulances through crowds. The bikes have been used at the Cardiff Half Marathon, the 2010 Tour of Britain Cycle Race, the Ryder Cup. Miami-Dade County in Florida has been using motorcycles for faster response times since a 2004 pilot program, with significant success. The program is credited with cutting response times in half. Austin County and Travis County EMS of Austin, Texas is using a fleet of four BMW G650 X-Ps to supplement the standard ambulance response. the motorcycles were deployed only for special events and times of unusually high traffic congestion, but the county planned to make them a regular system resource. Honda, BMW, and Yamaha motorcycles are common models used in many countries and departments. A number of manufacturers produce sidecars for motorcycles and scooters. Active motorcycle ambulance manufacturers include The Ranger Production Company, and Riders for Health, a charity which manufactures the Uhuru in Zimbabwe. 
