 MRC Human Nutrition Research is the largest research institute in the UK for human nutrition, and is based in Cambridge. In 1998 MRC Human Nutrition Research (HNR) was formed out of the restructuring of the Dunn Human Nutrition Unit following the resignation of Professor Roger Whitehead. The MRC (founded in 1913) had previously had a Human Nutrition Research Unit at the end of the Second World War, founded and directed by BS Platt, which was interested in serious nutritional deficiencies in children, that would cause significantly premature death and therefore HNR was formed in order to continue to progress the Medical Research Councils portfolio of strategic and applied nutrition research. The mission of HNR is to conduct nutrition research and surveillance to improve the health of the population with a focus on obesity and metabolic risk, musculoskeletal health, intestinal health and nutritional inequalities. HNR currently states that its 4 objectives are to: It is based at Peterhouse Technology Park, in south-east Cambridge, on the South Cambridgeshire-Cambridge boundary, round the corner from the Fulbourn - Cherry Hinton Tesco and Fulbourn Hospital. ARM Holdings have their headquarters on the same site, and the Technology Park is also home to Acambis, who make vaccines, and are sited as neighbours to HNR. It is divided into 3 main research departments and a support department which house research groups looking at: It also has a library which houses an important collection of research documents from a number of formative years in nutrition research. HNR conducts nutrition research and surveillance to improve the health of the population with a focus on obesity and metabolic risk, musculoskeletal health, intestinal health and nutritional inequalities. In November 1999 it discovered that children in the early 1950s, despite food rationing, had healthier diets than children today. They had a greater intake of calcium, from drinking more milk, and of iron, as they ate more red meat than poultry and iron containing dark green vegetables such as broccoli and kale. In the early 1950s, no children would have eaten pasta, but 50% of children in the 1990s did. However children in the 1950s were faced with more incurable illnesses, prevented today by vaccination. In September 2002, it proved a link between diabetes and being overweight. They found that people who had lost 9 lb in weight had reduced the chances of having diabetes by 58%. It participated in the National Diet and Nutrition Survey and the MRC's National Survey of Health and Development, which showed insights such as approximately five per cent of the UK's population are vegetarian. 
