 Nancy L. Snyderman, MD (born 1952) is an American physician and broadcast journalist. Since 2006, she has been the chief medical editor for NBC News, and frequently appears on NBC's Today and MSNBC to discuss medicine-related issues. Snyderman is also on the staff of the otolaryngology-head and neck surgery department at the University of Pennsylvania, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. She is certified by the American Board of Otolaryngology in head and neck surgery, and specializes in head and neck cancer. Snyderman's medical work has been widely published in peer reviewed journals, and she has been the recipient of numerous research grants from the American Cancer Society, the Kellogg Foundation, and the American Academy of Otolaryngology. Snyderman is the author of four books, Dr. Nancy Snyderman’s Guide to Good Health for Women Over Forty, Necessary Journeys, Girl in the Mirror: Mothers and Daughters in the Years of Adolescence, and Diet Myths That Keep Us Fat – And the 101 Truths That Will Save Your Waistline – And Maybe Even Your Life. She also writes a monthly column for Good Housekeeping magazine. She was born in St. Louis, Missouri. Snyderman attended South Side High School in Ft. Wayne, Indiana, graduating in 1970. She attended Indiana University, earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in microbiology. She went on to attend medical school at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, located in Omaha, Nebraska, earning a Doctor of Medicine degree from its College of Medicine in 1977. She is the mother of three children, Kate, Rachel, and Charlie. She followed up her training with medical residencies in both pediatrics and ear, nose, and throat surgery at the University of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in Pennsylvania. She moved to Little Rock, Arkansas, joining the surgical staff at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences in 1983, specializing in throat and neck cancers. Snyderman began her broadcasting career around 1984 at KATV, the ABC affiliate in Little Rock. She later served as a medical correspondent for KPIX-TV in San Francisco, California, in the 1990s. She served as a medical correspondent for ABC News for seventeen years, and was a contributor to 20/20, Primetime, and Good Morning America. Before leaving ABC News, she was a frequent substitute co-host on Good Morning America. She next served as vice president of consumer education for the health care corporation, Johnson & Johnson, where she led the independent educational initiative Understanding Health, focusing on educating and informing the public about health and medicine. In 1988, Snyderman moved to San Francisco where she practiced surgery at the California Pacific Medical Center. She joined NBC News as its chief medical editor in September 2006. Her reports have appeared on Today, NBC Nightly News with Brian Williams, Dateline NBC, MSNBC and MSNBC.com. She has reported on wide-ranging medical topics affecting both men and women, and has traveled the world extensively, reporting from many of the world's most-troubled areas. She served as a sports desk reporter for NBC Sports coverage of the 2008 Summer Olympics. Snyderman hosted the MSNBC program Dr. Nancy, which aired weekdays 12-1 p.m. ET. between June 29 and December 17, 2009. In 2012, Al Roker told Snyderman in an interview that he had "sharted" during a visit to the White House in 2002 as a result of his gastric bypass surgery in order to elicit an opinion from the Doctor as to the frequency of this type of event. In 1999, she returned over $50,000 to DrKoop.com, a healthcare website based in Austin, Texas, after violating insider trading rules prohibiting corporate officers and directors from profiting from a stock sale within six months of buying shares. At the time, she was a director of DrKoop.com, founded by former Surgeon General of the United States C. Everett Koop. Her husband, an investment banker, bought 1,650 shares of DrKoop.com, during its initial public offering (IPO) for $9 a share, and sold it a month later at $41.27 a share. Snyderman has stated that she supports selective abortion as a result of the detection of the presence of congenital disorders in the fetus before birth, proclaiming it to be "the science of today" and "I believe that this is a great way to prevent diseases." 
