 National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians (NAEMT) is a national Emergency medical services professional association representing all EMTs and Paramedics. The NAEMT educational programs also have an international scope. The mission statement of NAEMT (from their web site) "is to represent and serve emergency medical services personnel through advocacy, educational programs and research." Founded in 1975, the association is composed of multiple committees. Three unique educational programs are offered by the NAEMT. These short courses consist of several lectures, as well as teaching and evaluation stations, over two days, for a total of 16 hours of training. Advanced Medical Life Support (AMLS) as a course is sponsored by the NAEMT and endorsed by the National Association of EMS Physicians (NAEMSP). This course covers the most common medical complaints and provides method of rapidly assessing and managing a patient in medical crisis. Prehospital Trauma Life Support (PHTLS) as a course is based on the Advanced Trauma Life Support, a course for physicians developed by the American College of Surgeons, Committee on Trauma. PHTLS courses follow the principles of care of trauma patients as developed by this Committee on Trauma. The Committee on Trauma of the American College of Surgeons also provides the medical direction and content oversight for the PHTLS program. Although originating in the United States, PHTLS is international in scope and courses are found in 33 countries worldwide. PHTLS is also equivalent to ITLS course. Emergency Pediatric Care (EPC) was introduced in 2000 as the Pediatric Prehospital Care course. EPC replaced PPC in February 2007. The course provides prehospital providers instruction in the approach of to sick and injured children. Areas covered include respiratory, cardiovascular, medical, and traumatic emergencies, as well as the treatment of children with special health care requirements. EPC is an equivalent program as the pediatric advanced life support course. EMS Safety is a new course that focuses on the safety of the EMS Provider. The learning objectives are: -Identify key elements in the safe operation of an ambulance. -Describe techniques for moving and securing patients safely. -Recognize situations where the EMS practitioner may be at risk of violence, and how such situations may be either avoided or addressed. -Appreciate the importance of maintaining good personal health, and the impact of EMS service on practitioners' personal health. -Address safety elements in a variety of operational situations In March 2013, the National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians sponsored "EMS on the Hill Day" during which NAEMT staff members and other EMT professionals spoke to congressional staffers and Representatives about H.R. 235 the Veteran Emergency Medical Technician Support Act of 2013, asking them to support it. The Bill would amend the Public Health Service Act to direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to establish a demonstration program for states with a shortage of emergency medical technicians (EMTs) to streamline state requirements and procedures to assist veterans who completed military EMT training while serving in the Armed Forces to meet state EMT certification and licensure. The bill passed in the United States House of Representatives on February 12, 2013, and was referred to the United States Senate. 
