 Neosporin (from Neo, (Greek) new + Sporos, (Greek) seed) is the product branding and formulas now owned by Johnson & Johnson of an over-the-counter topical antibiotic ointment created under Warner-Lambert Consumer Healthcare, now a part of Pfizer. Neosporin is marketed for the prevention and fighting of infections and speeding the healing of wounds. However, there is little data supporting these claims, and in clinical trials, Neosporin is not more effective than simple petroleum jelly (see Efficacy, below). There is also significant concern that use of Neosporin contributes to the emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria. In the US, the only large market for Neosporin, the ointment has been shown to be of little use against MRSA bacteria and promote bacterial resistance; however such resistance is uncommon. As well, Neorporin is ineffective against the lethal strain of bacteria, ST8:USA300 strain. The original ointment contains three different antibiotics: bacitracin, neomycin, and polymyxin B, in a relatively low molecular weight patented base of cocoa butter, cottonseed oil, sodium pyruvate, tocopheryl acetate, and petroleum jelly. The generic name for these products, regardless of the base, is "Triple Antibiotic Ointment". In China, this product is called "Complex Polymyxin B Ointment," which is manufactured by Zhejiang Reachall Pharmaceutical. The product was also marketed by The Upjohn Company under the name "Mycitracin", until 1997 when that name was acquired by Johnson & Johnson. Some people have allergic reactions to neomycin, so a "Double antibiotic ointment" is sold that only contains bacitracin and polymyxin B, such as the co-brand Polysporin. A "Plus" variant of the ointment exists that adds the analgesic pramoxine, but uses the cheap, simple, long-lasting, but heavier petroleum jelly base that is common to many OTC topicals. The latest version of this, a high-absorption cream, removes the bacitracin which is unstable in such a base, but keeps the analgesic. Despite numerous trials, there is little data that Neosporin provides any benefit to users. As compared to covering a small wound with simple petroleum jelly, Neosporin does not provide any benefit, but commonly causes contact dermatitis The high incidence of contact dermatitis associated with Neosporin has earned it the Allergen of the Year award. 
