 The , or No Leprosy Patients in Our Prefecture Movement, was a Japanese social movement　starting in the early 1930s that aimed for the elimination of leprosy patients in each prefecture by hospitalizing patients in public sanatoriums. This movement was said to have started in 1929. According to Yamamoto, the movement started when district welfare officers of Aichi Prefecture visited the Nagashima Aiseien Sanatorium. However, Tsutomu Sato wrote that it started in 1934 when the welfare officers visited the sanatorium in 1934. There were other views that the movement started in 1930. Problematic was the fact that when a patient was forcibly hospitalized by police, the patient and his or her family was exposed to the leprosy stigma of the neighborhood. The people at large thought that leprosy patients were very unclean and dirty; all leprosy patients should be hospitalized and then their prefecture should be "purified". The movement fluctuated in intensity according to time, and in respective prefectures. Some patients escaped from the sanatoriums without permission. Tottori Prefecture was most enthusiastic among other prefectures. The initiative of the movement was taken by the Governor of the Prefecture who collected donations for the special houses where patients from his prefecture were to be hospitalized. Less but considerably enthusiastic were Fukuoka Prefecture, Yamaguchi Prefecture, Miyagi Prefecture, Toyama Prefecture, Okayama Prefecture, Saitama Prefecture, Aichi Prefecture and Mie Prefecture. Kensuke Mitsuda, a leprosy scholar and the director of Nagashima Aiseien Sanatorium, was the leader of the movement. After the start of the 1931 leprosy prevention law of Japan, Mitsuda initiated a "donate 10-tsubo houses" (33.058 square meters) to sanatoriums" movement to accommodate new leprosy patients together with the "no leprosy patients in our prefecture movement". This movement became very active with the co-operation of news media, religious groups, schools and other groups. In 1931, with the donation by Empress Teimei, who had been interested in the condition of leprosy patients for a long time, a leprosy prevention association was formed with Eiichi Shibusawa as its president. A nationwide anti-leprosy movement was started, with the leprosy prevention week around June 25, the birthday of Empress Teimei. A school of Jodo Shinshu, for example, started an association called Otani Komyokai, to promote the movement. The leprosy prevention association started a movement by holding lectures and movie presentations, distribution of posters and pamphlets to promote hospitalization of leprosy patients in public sanatoriums. Among them, movie presentations proved the most effective measure. With the heightening of the movement, many leprosy patients were hospitalized in public sanatoriums, and some sanatoriums were overcrowded. The food situation worsened especially in Nagashima Aiseien Sanatorium where Kensuke Mitsuda was the director, leading to riots in 1936. In Tottori Prefecture, Kiyotatsu Tatsuda, the governor of the prefecture, started a movement for donations and invited Kensuke Mitsuda for lectures and built six houses in the Airakuen Sanatorium to accommodate leprosy patients from Tottori Prefecture. Masako Ogawa was a Japanese physician who worked at the Nagashima Aiseien Sanatorium. She wrote a book, Spring in a small island, in 1938, about her experiences in persuading leprosy patients in remote areas of Japan into hospitalization. It created a sensation in Japan, and was made into a film. She was criticized for accelerating the "No leprosy patients our in prefecture" movement and giving an impression that leprosy was to be feared. Eiko Arai coined the term "Spring in a small island phenomenon", explaining the wave of support concerning Masako Ogawa. In 1927, the Japanese government planned the dissolution of living places of leprosy patients. Mamoru Uchida and Soichiro Shiotani studied the conditions of the communities of the Honmyoji Temple in Kumamoto Prefecture. Six patients wanted to enter Kyushu Sanatorium, which was later Kikuchi Keifuen Sanatorium, but the director Matsuki Miyazaki did not accept them. So, they brought the patients to Nagashima Aiseien and serious discussions started, which included Kensuke Mitsuda. The directors of sanatoriums decided to dissolve the leprosy communities. The Kumamoto Prefecture Police Department took the leadership and 157 patients were hospitalized by 220 people, including the policemen and workers of the Kikuchi Keifuen Sanatorium. The patients were further taken to other sanatoriums. The Ministry of Interior Affairs which was responsible for police and leprosy control, was abolished on December 31, 1947 and leprosy problems were handled by prefectures. The names of patients previously reported to the head of police stations were reported to the governors. In November 1947, the second wave of the movement started with a note from the Ministry of Welfare on the no leprosy patients in our prefecture movement. It stated that the elimination of leprosy is important for the building of a cultural state, and therefore, should be accomplished. Hospitalization should be started with contagious type leprosy patients. In 1949, another note was issued and requested to hold training courses for physicians and technicians, the holding of mass examinations, making a list of suspected patients, hospitalization and even collecting rumors of patients. At the peak of the second wave of the movement, Fujimoto Incident occurred in Kumamoto. Matsuo Fujimoto was a Japanese leprosy patient who was executed because he was charged for a 1952 murder and was executed by hanging in 1962. His guilty verdict, death sentence, and execution made controversies, because he suffered from leprosy and the Japanese government was urging the discrimination and prejudice against the leper patients at that time. When he was to be hospitalized was at the height of no leprosy in our prefecture movement. Directly responsible for leprosy control was the Department of Health, every Prefecture (Diagnosis, recommendation of hospitalization, hospitalization); upper organizations included the Ministry of Welfare, Department of Public Health, Section of Tuberculosis Prevention; Department of Medicine, Section of National sanatoria, National leprosy sanatoria. Under the organizations were Medical schools, physicians (of hospitals, practicing physicians). The leprosy prevention association was established in 1931 with donations from Empress Teimei. After the death of Empress Teimei, it changed in 1952 to Tofu Kyokai. Prefectural leprosy associations were established in every prefecture. Welfare officers, news media, women's groups, schools, religious groups, and various physicians worked for the movement. After the war, welfare officers were excluded from the movement, since they might leak the names of leprosy patients to others, spreading leprosy stigma. Physicians who lectured for the movement included Kensuke Mitsuda, Fumio Hayashi (doctor), Isamu Tajiri, Mamoru Uchida and others. They were mostly physicians under Kensuke Mitsuda. The effects of the no leprosy in our prefecture movement are nothing but the effects of leprosy control. They may cover every aspect of leprosy patients and their families, including everyday life, education, stigma, prejudice, human rights, and suicide. The following apology was issued by the Ohtani Sect of Jōdo Shinshu Buddhism: The Prime Minister, the Minister of Welfare, and the National Diet published statements of apology to leprosy patients and their families immediately after the leprosy prevention law was ruled to be unconstitutional in 2001. Immediately after the leprosy prevention law was ruled to be unconstitutional in 2001, several prefectural governors apologized at public sanatoriums for the compulsory hospitalization resulting from the leprosy prevention law. Based on a law on the grant of compensation to the in-patients of Hansen's disease sanatoriums in 2001, patients who had been hospitalized in sanatoriums from 1960 to 1998, received compensation depending on the period of hospitalization, namely the period was the time when the law was unconstitutional. The compensation varied from 8,000,000 yen to 14,000,000 yen per person. 
