 Non-surgical liposuction is an alternative to surgical liposuction, in which fat is reduced using various technologies which attempt to melt and liquify a person's fat cells using non-invasive methods such as ultrasonics, lasers and injections of chemical agents. In the standard techniques used the skin normally gets tightened in order to avoid excess skin caused by fat reduction. The first technology was developed in approximately the late 1980s, and was approved in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2007. The subject is a rapidly evolving field, with some of the newest technologies not yet approved by the FDA but approved by health departments in other countries. In his book Mantalk: Tips from the Pros for Good Looks, Good Health, And Maintaining Your Competitive Edge, plastic surgeon Elliot Jacobs wrote: Injection of chemical agents, known as mesotherapy, is typically done using the compound phosphatidylcholine. Non-surgical liposuction may be used on various areas of the human body, including the face, back, mons pubis, thighs, hips, buttocks, knees, upper arms, chin, cheeks and neck. The procedure has also been used to treat gynecomastia by reducing excess fat from enlarged male breasts. There are three basic technologies used: laser, ultrasound waves and "CoolLipo" laser. The laser technologies are differentiated mainly by the wavelength of light used. All of the technologies are claimed to work selectively on the fat cells without affecting the neighboring cells, and with low, or no downtime. They require no anesthesia and are claimed to have no risks or side effects. In some cases technologies are combined together for better results. Ultrasound fat reduction is readily gaining popularity as the safest non-surgical method to remove fat from the body. Not to be confused with "ultrasound assisted liposuction", ultrasound fat reduction is a non-invasive fat removal treatment. There is supposedly no pain, no recovery time and no side effects. Ultrasound waves are transmitted with an ultrasound probe into the fat layer of the skin, stimulating lipolysis of fat cells. This causes triglycerides to be released from fat cells. These fats are then expelled from the body naturally. Less fats in the body results in visible inch loss at the treated area. Costs may vary depending on treatment area and clinic prices can range from $700 to treat arm fats to $2,200 for stomach fat, per treatment. While this may cost less than invasive liposuction, the cost of such treatments do add up. The non-invasive laser fat reduction treatment uses low doses of light laser therapy to target areas of the body which don’t respond to normal diet and exercise. Low levels of laser energy disrupt the fat cell membranes, releasing intra-cellular fat. This causes the cell to lose its round shape by changing the permeability of the cell membrane. This does not affect the skin, blood vessels and nerves around it. Triglycerides spill out from the broken cell membranes and are released into the interstitial space, where they are slowly transported through the body’s natural metabolic functions to be used by the body as an energy source. Intense exercise after treatment accelerates the breakdown and removal of fat from the area. Best results could achieve in a course of eight treatments for each body area, over four to six weeks. However it is possible to get results from as few as 4 treatments. Compared to surgical liposuction and other Ultrasound or laser techniques laser fat reduction is much more affordable with similar results. Since it is non-invasive and non-surgical, there is no recovery time. Patients can immediately resume their daily activities. One to two days of discomfort is possible. Visible reduction in body circumference, including arms, stomach, thighs, buttocks. Numerous risks have been noted with this procedure. The cited study notes 'Safety of UAL is controversial. One study of 250 consecutive UAL patients concluded that internal UAL is "both safe and effective" despite three cases of dermal necrosis (1.2 percent), 28 postoperative seromas (11.2 percent), and 35 patients with Reston foam blisters. (Maxwell GP. Ultrasound-assisted lipoplasty: a clinical study of 250 consecutive patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 101:189-202,1998). Based on this report, most experienced liposuction surgeons have concluded that UAL is less safe than Tumescent Liposuction with microcannulas.' 
