 Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever is a viral hemorrhagic fever caused by a Flavivirus. It is found in Siberia. It is named for an outbreak in Omsk. Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever is caused by the Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever Virus (OHFV), a member of the Flavivirus family. The virus was discovered by Mikhail Chumakov and his colleagues between 1945 and 1947 in Omsk, Russia. The infection could be found in western Siberia, in places including Omsk, Novosibirsk, Kurgan, and Tyumen. The virus survives in water and is transferred to humans via contaminated water or an infected tick. There are a number of symptoms of the virus. In the first 1–8 days the first phase begins. The symptoms in this phase are: In 1–2 weeks, some patients may recover, although others might not. They might experience a focal hemorrhage in mucosa of gingival (relating to the gums of your mouth), uterus, and lungs, a papulovesicular rash (a rash in papules and vesicles) on the soft palate, cervical lymph adenopathy (it occurs in the neck which that enlarges the lymph glandular tissue), and occasional neurological involvement. If the patient still has OHF after 3 weeks, then a second wave of symptoms will occur. It also includes signs of encephalitis (inflammation of the brain). If they recover from OHF they may experience hearing loss, hair loss, and behavioral or psychological difficulties associated with neurological conditions. If the sickness does not fade away, the patient will die. Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever could be diagnosed by getting virus isolation from blood, or by serologic testing using immunosorbent serological assay. OHF rating of fatality is 0.5 percent through 3 percent. There is no specific treatment for OHF so far but one way to help get rid of OHF is by supportive therapy. Supportive therapy helps maintain hydration and helps to provide precautions for patients with bleeding disorders. Preventing Omsk Hemorrhagic Fever consists of avoiding activity high in tick exposure. This puts persons engaged in camping, farming, forestry, and hunting (especially the Siberian muskrat) at great risk. Those spending time outdoors should wear protective clothing and use insect repellent for protection. The main hosts of OHFV are rodents like the non–native muskrat. OHFV originates in ticks, who then transmit it to rodents by biting them. Humans become infected through tick bites or contact with a muskrat. Humans can also become infected through contact with blood, feces or urine of a dead or sick muskrat (or any type of rat). The virus can also spread through milk from infected goats or sheep. The infection is highly contagious. Those who follow all the procedures will have a smaller chance of getting the disease. 
