 OpenEMR is a Free and Open Source, Practice management and Electronic Medical Records software application. It is ONC Complete Ambulatory EHR certified and it features fully integrated electronic medical records, practice management, scheduling, electronic billing, internationalization, and free support. It can run on Microsoft systems, Unix-like systems (Linux, UNIX, and BSD systems), Mac OS X and other platforms. OpenEMR is one of the most popular free electronic medical records in use today with over 3,700 downloads per month. The community maintains the official OpenEMR web site at open-emr.org. OpenEMR was originally developed by Synitech and version 1.0 was released in June 2001 as MP Pro (MedicalPractice Professional). Much of the code was then reworked for HIPAA compliance and improved security, and the product was reintroduced as OpenEMR version 1.3 a year later, in July 2002. It became an open source project and was registered on SourceForge.net on August 13, 2002. The project evolved through version 2.0 and the Pennington Firm (Pennfirm) took over as its primary maintainer in 2003. Walt Pennington transferred the OpenEMR software repository to SourceForge in March 2005, where it remains today. Mr. Pennington also established Rod Roark, Andres Paglayan and James Perry, Jr. as administrators of the project. Walt Pennington, Andres Paglayan and James Perry eventually took other directions and were replaced by Brady Miller in August 2009. So at this time Rod Roark and Brady Miller are the project's co-administrators. The official OpenEMR code repository was migrated from cvs to git on 10/20/2010. Currently, the project's official code repository is on Sourceforge. There are also official mirrored code repositories on Github, Google Code, Gitorious, Bitbucket, Assembla, CodePlex and Repo.or.cz. OpenEMR has a vibrant open-source development community with over 70 developers having contributed to the project. There are 157 developers with personal OpenEMR code repositories on Github. Ohloh considers OpenEMR to have "a relatively large team, in the top 10% of all project teams on Ohloh". Because this is an open source project that does not register its users, it is very difficult to estimate the number of practitioners that are using this software. In the US, it has been estimated that there are more than 5,000 installations of OpenEMR in physician offices and other small healthcare facilities serving more than 30 million patients. Internationally, it has been estimated that OpenEMR is installed in over 15,000 healthcare facilities, translating into more than 45,000 practitioners using the system which are serving greater than 90 million patients. The Peace Corps plan to incorporate OpenEMR into their EHR system in 2013. Siaya District Hospital, a 220-bed hospital in rural Kenya, is using OpenEMR. HP India is planning to utilize OpenEMR for their Mobile Health Centre Project. There are also articles describing single clinician deployments and a free clinic deployment. Internationally, it is known that there are practitioners in Pakistan, Puerto Rico, Australia, Sweden, Holland, Israel, India, Malaysia, Nepal, Indonesia, Bermuda, Armenia, Kenya, and Greece that are either testing or actively using OpenEMR for use as a free electronic medical records program. OpenEMR is a "LAMP" type of web based software application that uses a web server such as Apache, MySQL as the database and PHP as its programming language. As with most "LAMP" architecture, OpenEMR can run on Linux, Unix, BSD, Mac OS X, and Microsoft architectures. Both OpenEMR versions 4.1.0 (released on 9/23/2011) and 4.1.1 (released on 8/31/2012) have ONC Complete Ambulatory EHR Certification. OpenEMR was certified by ICSA Labs and the OEMR organization is a non-profit entity that manages/provides this certification. OpenEMR received a 2012 Bossie Award in the "The Best Open Source Applications" category. OEMR is a 501(c)(3) tax exempt entity that was organized in July, 2010 to support the OpenEMR project. OEMR is the entity that holds the ONC Complete Ambulatory EHR Certification with ICSA Labs. 
