 Oral and maxillofacial surgery is surgery to treat many diseases, injuries and defects in the head, neck, face, jaws and the hard and soft tissues of the oral (mouth) and maxillofacial (jaws and face) region. It is an internationally recognized surgical specialty. In some countries, including the United States, it is a recognized specialty of dentistry; in others, including the UK, it is recognized as a medical specialty. In several countries oral and maxillofacial surgery is a speciality recognized by a professional association, as is the case with the American Dental Association, Royal College of Surgeons of England, Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, Royal College of Dentists of Canada, Royal Australasian College of Dental Surgeons and the Brazilian Federal Council of Odontology (CFO). In other countries oral and maxillofacial surgery as a specialty exists but under different forms as the work is sometimes performed by a single or dual qualified specialist depending on each country's regulations and training opportunities available. An oral and maxillofacial surgeon is a regional specialist surgeon treating the entire craniomaxillofacial complex: anatomical area of the mouth, jaws, face, skull, as well as associated structures. Depending upon the jurisdiction, maxillofacial surgeons may require training in dentistry, surgery, and general medicine; training and qualification in medicine may be undertaken optionally even if not required. An optional medical qualification can qualify the holder for hospital and operating room access not open to others. Oral and maxillofacial surgery is universally recognized as one of the specialties of dentistry. In the UK and many other countries OMS is a medical specialty requiring both medical and dental degrees, culminating in an appropriate qualification (e.g. Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, FRCS, in the UK). All oral and maxillofacial surgeons must obtain a university degree in dentistry before beginning residency training in oral and maxillofacial surgery. They also may choose to undergo further training in a 1 or 2 year subspecialty Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Fellowship Training in the following areas: The popularity of oral and maxillofacial surgery as a career for persons whose first degree was medicine, not dentistry, seems to be increasing in few EU countries. However, the public fund spend for 14 years of training is a big concern of the state. Integrated programs are becoming more available to medical graduates allowing them to complete the dental degree requirement in about 3 years in order for them to advance to subsequently complete Oral and Maxillofacial surgical training. Treatments may be performed on the craniomaxillofacial complex: mouth, jaws, neck, face, skull, and include: Oral and maxillofacial surgery is one of the nine dental specialties recognized by the American Dental Association, Royal College of Dentists of Canada, the Royal Australasian College of Dental Surgeons. Oral and maxillofacial surgery requires 4–6 years of further formal university training after dental school (DDS, BDent, DMD or BDS). Four-year residency programs grant a certificate of specialty training in oral and maxillofacial surgery. Six-year residency programs grant the specialty certificate in addition to a medical degree (MD, DO, MBBS, MBChB etc.). Both 4 and 6 year graduates are designated US "Board Eligible," those that earn "Certification" are Diplomats'. Approximately 50% of the training programs in the US, 100% of the programs in Australia and New Zealand, and 20% of Canadian training programs, are "dual-degree". The trainees obtain a degree in medicine (MD, DO, MBBS, MBChB etc.) as well as a specialty certificate in oral and maxillofacial surgery, although the scope of surgery remains unchanged. The typical training program for an oral and maxillofacial surgeon is: In addition, graduates of oral and maxillofacial surgery training programs can pursue fellowships, typically 1 – 2 years in length, in the following areas: 
