 The Orange County Fire Authority (OCFA) is the agency that provides fire protection and emergency medical services for unincorporated areas of Orange County, California and cities that contract OCFA's services. OCFA serves nearly 1.8 million residents in 23 cities and unincorporated areas from 71 fire stations. The OCFA Headquarters is located in the city of Irvine. The Operations Department is responsible for directly rendering aid to the community. In 2006, OCFA responded to 79,718 incidents within its jurisdiction and 4,084 mutual aid calls. The department is split into six geographic divisions numbered I–VI. The Fire Prevention Department is dedicated to proactively protecting the public by identifying and analyzing community risk; educating and informing; and developing, implementing, and enforcing regulations. There are 12 paramedic vans, 100 paramedic engines, 10 paramedic trucks, 23 paramedic assessment engines, 3 paramedic assessment trucks, 12 Basic Life Support (BLS) engines, and 9 BLS trucks staffed 24/7 by career personnel. 4 BLS engines, 8 BLS patrols, and 6 BLS squads staffed by reserve personnel on an on-call basis. and 3 emergency transports staffed by department personnel and numerous other private ambulance staffed by private personnel that provide transport and emergency medical services to all of the areas of Orange County covered by the Orange County Fire Authority. The standard OCFA response for a structure fire is 3 engine companies,one patrol, One truck company, one paramedic van and one Battalion Chief. The department has a General Fund budget of US$220.8 million for the 2006/07 fiscal year. Prior to 1980 the California Department of Forestry (now known as CAL-Fire) operated the Orange County Fire Department under contract. In 1980 then California Governor Jerry Brown cancelled the California Department of Forestry contract with the Orange County Fire Department against the wishes of Orange County. As a result, Orange County operated the Orange County Fire Department (OCFD) beginning May 16, 1980. Due to the incorporations of new cities and additional cities contracting with the County Fire Department, in 1991 the OCFD began exploring the possibility of reorganizing as a separate agency - first as a Special District and then as a Joint Powers Authority. The County filed for bankruptcy in 1994, which further encouraged Orange County Fire Department to reorganize as a JPA, known as the Orange County Fire Authority. The current Fire Chief is Keith Richter, and the previous chief (1997–2009) is Charles "Chip" Prather. 
