 Oropharyngeal cancer is a disease which malignant cells form in the tissue of oropharynx. Oropharynx is a middle part of the throat which includes the base of the tongue, the tonsils, the soft palate, and the walls of the pharynx. Oropharyngeal cancers can be divided into two types, HPV-positive, which are related to human papillomavirus infection, and HPV-negative cancers, which are usually linked to alcohol or tobacco use. For patients with advanced oropharyngeal cancer the combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy appears to be as efficient as surgical management. Shiley et al compared the maintenance of swallowing function with the two approaches. They studied 27 patients who underwent the advanced stage (III and IV) of oropharyngeal cancer. Among those patients, 67% had base of tongue lesions and 82% of them used gastrostomy tube either before or during the treatment. Three months after the chemoradiation, 33% of the patients were consuming all nutrition orally, 45% had some oral intake but still had the tube feeding, and 22% had no oral intake at all. The results showed that the short-term incidence of gastrostomy tube dependence after chemo radiation was similar to that after surgical management of oropharyngeal cancer at their institution. Following are the possible signs of oropharyngeal cancer. Following are the risk factors that can increase the risk of developing oropharyngeal cancer. CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH MALIGNANT TRANSFORMATION HIGH-risk lesions Medium- risk lesions. low-risk lesions. Those with HPV-positive cancers tend to have higher survival rates. The prognosis for people with oropharyngeal cancer depends on the age and health of the person and the stage of the disease. It is important for people with oropharyngeal cancer to have follow-up exams for the rest of their lives as cancer can occur in nearby areas. In addition, it is important to eliminate risk factors such as smoking and drinking alcohol, which increase the risk for second cancers. There are three ways of cancer spreading in the body. Abnormal cells are found in the lining of the oropharynx, These may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Cancer has formed and is 20 millimetres or smaller and has not spread outside the oropharynx. Cancer has formed and is larger than 20 millimetres but not larger than 40 millimetres. Also it has not yet spread outside the oropharynx. Cancer has spread to other parts of the body; the tumor may be any size and may have spread to lymph nodes. ;Glossary Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) is a type of head and neck cancer that begins in the oropharynx, the middle part of the throat that includes the soft palate, the base of the tongue, the tonsils and the side and back wall of the throat. Squamous cell cancers of the tonsils are more strongly associated with human papillomavirus infection than are cancers of other regions of the head and neck. In 2010 American actor Michael Douglas reported to have oropharyngeal cancer. Brook I. (2010) My Voice: A Physician’s Personal Experience with Throat Cancer. Creatspace Publishing. ISBN 1-4392-6386-8 
