 Osteopathic manipulative medicine (OMM), also known as osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT), is the hands-on manual medical system of treatment which utilizes the distinct osteopathic philosophy, structural diagnosis, and use of osteopathic manipulative techniques in the diagnosis and management of the patient by a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) OMM considers the physical and mental health of a patient and how either aspect, or both aspects, may contribute to an observed disease state. D.O.s are trained to perform a structural diagnosis and integrate it into the entire history and physical taking process and to use OMT techniques when appropriate. Research indicates that OMM is effective at reducing lower back pain and may be useful for treating certain other conditions. Andrew Taylor Still, M.D., D.O. was a 19th century American physician and Civil War surgeon who founded osteopathic medicine. Following the loss of three of his children to spinal meningitis, Still became dissatisfied with contemporary medical practices and sought to further medical understanding and treatment. Still used his understanding of anatomy to first screen for structural abnormalities (somatic dysfunction) and subsequently restore normal function. He also emphasized the connection between mental, physical, emotional, and spiritual health and taught that each plays an important role in the patient's overall health. The osteopathic medical philosophy is defined as the concept of health care that embraces the concept of the unity of the living organism’s structure (anatomy) and function (physiology). The four major principles of osteopathic medicine are: These principles are not held by Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine to be empirical laws; they serve, rather, as the underpinnings of the osteopathic philosophy on health and disease. Osteopathic manipulative treatment is considered to be only one component of osteopathic medicine and may be used alone or in combination with pharmacotherapy, rehabilitation, surgery, patient education, diet, and exercise. OMT techniques are not necessarily unique to osteopathic medicine; other disciplines, such as physical therapy or chiropractics, use similar techniques. OMT is commonly used to treat musculoskeletal problems such as lower back pain and thoracic outlet syndrome, but it may also be used as an adjunct therapy for other disorders like migraine and pneumonia. Muscle energy techniques address somatic dysfunction through stretching and muscle contraction. For example, if a person is unable to fully abduct her arm, the treating physician raises the patient's arm near the end of the patient's range of motion, also called the edge of the restrictive barrier. The patient then tries to lower her arm, while the physician provides resistance. This resistance against the patient's motion allows for isometric contraction of the patient's muscle. Once the patient relaxes, her range of motion increases slightly. The repetition of alternating cycles of contraction and subsequent relaxation help the treated muscle improve its range of motion. Muscle energy is similar to a stretching technique in sports medicine called proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF stretching) in that they both involve isometric contraction of a target muscle or muscle group with the aim of enhancing joint mobility by inducing muscle relaxation. Muscle energy techniques are contraindicated in patients with fractures, crush injuries, dislocations, joint instability, severe muscle spasms or strains, severe osteoporosis, severe whiplash injury, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, severe illness, and recent surgery. Counterstrain is a system of diagnosis and treatment that considers the physical dysfunction to be a continuing, inappropriate strain reflex, which is inhibited during treatment by applying a position of mild strain in the direction exactly opposite to that of the reflex. After diagnosis of a counterstrain tender point, the identified tender point is treated by the osteopathic physician who, while monitoring the tender point, positions the patient such that the point is no longer tender to palpation. This position is held for ninety seconds and the patient is subsequently returned to her normal posture. Most often this position of ease is usually achieved by shortening the muscle of interest. The use of counterstrain technique is contraindicated in patients with severe osteoporosis, pathology of the vertebral arteries, and in patients who are very ill or cannot voluntarily relax during the procedure. High velocity, low amplitude (HVLA) is a technique which employs a rapid, targeted, therapeutic force of brief duration that travels a short distance within the anatomic range of motion of a joint and engages the restrictive barrier in one or more places of motion to elicit release of restriction. The use of HVLA is contraindicated in patients with Down syndrome due to instability of the atlantoaxial joint which may stem from ligamentous laxity, and in pathologic bone conditions such as fracture, history of a pathologic fracture, osteomyelitis, osteoporosis, and severe cases of rheumatoid arthritis. HVLA is also contraindicated in patients with vascular disease such as aneurysms, or disease of the carotid arteries or vertebral arteries. Patients taking ciprofloxacin or anticoagulants, or who have local metastases should not receive HVLA. Myofascial release is a form of soft tissue therapy used to treat somatic dysfunction and the resultant pain and restriction of motion. Treatment requires continual palpatory feedback to achieve release of myofascial tissues. This is accomplished by relaxing contracted muscles, increasing circulation and lymphatic drainage, and stimulating the stretch reflex of muscles and overlying fascia. Fascia is the soft tissue component of the connective tissue that provides support and protection for most structures within the human body, including muscle. This soft tissue can become restricted due to psychogenic disease, overuse, trauma, infectious agents, or inactivity, often resulting in pain, muscle tension, and corresponding diminished blood flow. Although fascia and its corresponding muscle are the main targets of myofascial release, other tissue may be affected as well, including other connective tissue. Lymphatic pump treatments are manual techniques which encourage lymph flow in the lymphatic system. Lymphatic pump treatment techniques increase lymph flow through the external application of forces to the thoracic cage, abdomen, pelvic diaphragm, legs, and over the spleen and the liver. The first modern lymphatic pump technique was developed in 1920, although osteopathic physicians used various forms of lymphatic techniques as early as the late 19th century. Research shows that two types of lymphatic techniques, the thoracic pump and the pedal pump, are both safe for patients with traumatic brain injuries, and do not raise intra-cranial pressure. Research in animal models has demonstrated that lymphatic pump techniques produce a strong, short-term increase in the flow of lymphatic fluid, and stimulate the mobilization of immune cells in the lymphoid tissue of the gastrointestinal tract, from both the mesenteric lymph nodes and gut-associated lymphoid tissue; preliminary research in humans suggests that lymphatic pump techniques may be able to improve the immune response to vaccinations. Relative contraindications for the use of lymphatic pump treatments include fractures, abscesses or localized infections, and severe bacterial infections with body temperature elevated higher than . Research on the topic of somatic dysfunction and the use of osteopathic manipulative medicine (OMM/OMT) has yielded mixed conclusions. In an article published in the New England Journal of Medicine in November 1999, researchers concluded that osteopathic manipulative medicine and traditional drug therapy resulted in equivalent resolution of lower back pain in a nearly identical time frame. The difference was that participants receiving osteopathic manipulative medicine required less pharmaceutical intervention. The advantage of osteopathic manipulative medicine was a diminution of adverse drug reactions while the disadvantage was the greater amount of physician time required for each patient. A 2005 meta-analysis and systematic review of six randomized controlled trials of osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) that involved blinded assessments of lower back pain in ambulatory settings concluded that OMT significantly reduces low back pain, and that the level of pain reduction is greater than expected from placebo effects alone and persists for at least three months. The National Institutes of Health's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine states that overall, studies have shown that spinal manipulation can provide mild to moderate relief from low-back pain and appears to be as effective as conventional medical treatments. In 2007 guidelines, the American College of Physicians and the American Pain Society include spinal manipulation as one of several treatment options for practitioners to consider using when pain does not improve with self-care. Recent research into spinal manipulation for low-back pain has begun to look at the effects of different forms of manipulation, as well as treatment duration and frequency. Studies have found that spinal manipulation provides relief from low-back pain at least over the short term (i.e., up to 3 months), and that pain-relieving effects may continue for up to 1 year. Spinal manipulation is generally a safe treatment for low-back pain. Serious complications are very rare. Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine and academic researchers have conducted preliminary research to determine the efficacy of OMT techniques to manage and/or co-manage conditions such as asthma and acute otitis media in children, and pneumonia. In a 2012 Osteopathic Family Physician review article, the authors gave OMT's ability to reduce the use of pain medications in back pain a grade A recommendation. The use of OMT in reducing pneumonia patients' use of antibiotics and length of stay in the hospital received a grade B recommendation; the use of OMT as an adjunct treatment in acute otitis media also received a grade B recommendation. In 2013, a systematic review and meta-analysis of five randomized controlled trials concluded that existing evidence suggests that OMT may improve lower urinary tract symptoms in adult women such as urinary incontinence (involuntary leakage of urine), nocturia (waking up at night to urinate), and urinary hesitancy, but called for further study with additional large, rigorous randomized controlled trials. A 2013 Cochrane Review reviewed six randomized controlled trials which investigated the effect of four types of chest physiotherapy (including OMT) as adjunctive treatments for pneumonia in adults and concluded that current evidence suggests that OMT reduces the duration of hospital stay, duration of intravenous antibiotic use, and total antibiotic use, but did not improve primary patient outcomes including fever, improvement on X-ray, cure rate, or mortality. 
