 Patella dislocation is an injury of the knee, typically caused by a direct blow or a sudden twist of the leg. It occurs when the patella (kneecap) slips out of its normal position in the patellofemoral groove, and generally causes intense pain with effusion. Open or arthroscopic surgery may be used to repair damage, but are typically avoided since rates of re-injury, knee function, and patients' opinions do not differ much from conservative treatment. The patella generally dislocates laterally, and can be accompanied by acute pain and disability. Immediate reduction can be accomplished by hyperextension of the knee, and providing a medialward pressure to move the patella back into the patellofemoral groove. Hyperextension of the knee on its own could possibly move the patella into place, because this motion locks the knee in place. When the knee is locked the ligaments are twisted and taut, allowing the muscles involved to relax and the patella to slide back into place. If that does not work, a medical professional must manually perform an orthopedic reduction. Swelling and impaired mobility follow patellar dislocation, and a rehabilitation program of six to sixteen weeks is recommended whether or not the patient undergoes surgery. Young athletes suffer patellar dislocations more commonly than any other group, and the average age of occurrences is 16–20 yrs old. Sports commonly associated with the injury involve sudden twisting motions of the knee and/or impact (e.g. soccer, gymnastics and ice hockey). It can also occur when someone trips over an object or slips on a slick surface, especially if the person has predisposing factors. The patella is a triangular sesamoid bone, which is embedded in the tendon, and rests in the patellofemoral groove, an articular cartilage-lined hollow at the end of the thigh bone (femur) where the thigh bone meets the shin bone (tibia). Several ligaments and tendons hold the patella in place and allow it to move up and down the patellofemoral groove when the leg bends. The top of the patella attaches to the quadriceps muscle via the quadriceps tendon, the middle to the vastus medialis obliquus (VMO) and vastus lateralis muscles, and the bottom to the head of the tibia (tibial tuberosity) via the patellar tendon, which is a continuation of the quadriceps femoris tendon. The medial patellofemoral ligament attaches horizontally in the inner knee to the adductor magnus tendon and is the structure most often damaged during a patellar dislocation. Finally, the lateral collateral ligament and the medial collateral ligament stabilize the patella on either side. Any of these structures can sustain damage during a patellar dislocation. Patellar dislocations occur by: In a journal by the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Brian Waterman collected incidence rate data in respect to sex, age and race in the U.S. Patellar dislocations have been estimated to occur among an at risk –population of 1,774,210,081 people per year. The breakdown of the incidence rates found in AM J sports medicine journal, among the ages of 10–17 years old were found to be about 29 per 100,000 persons per year, while the adult population average for this type of injury ranged between 5.8 and 7.0 per 100,000 persons per year. The highest rates for this type of injury were found in the youngest age groups, while the rates declined with increasing ages.Race is a significant factor for this injury, where Hispanics, African-Americans and Caucasians had slightly higher rates of patellar dislocation due to the types of athletic activity involved in basketball 18.2%, soccer 6.9% and football 6.9%, according to Brian Waterman. Patients often describe pain as being “inside the knee cap.” The leg tends to flex even when relaxed. To assess the knee, a clinician can perform the Patellar Apprehension Test by moving the patella back and forth while the patient flexes the knee at approximately 30 degrees. The patient can do the patella tracking assessment by making a single leg squat and standing, or, lying on his or her back with knee extended from flexed position. A patella that slips medially on early flexion is called the , and indicates imbalance between the VMO and lateral structures. A risk that causes patellar symptoms can be known as the lateral patellar compression syndrome, which can be caused from lack of balance or inflammation in the joints. The pathophysiology of the kneecap is complex and it deals with the osseous soft tissue or abnormalities within the patellofemoral groove. The patellar symptoms cause knee extensor dysplasia and sensitive small variations affect the muscular mechanism that controls the joint movements. When there is too much tension on the patella, the ligaments will weaken and be susceptible to tearing ligaments or tendons due to shear force or torsion force, which then displaces the kneecap from its origination. Another cause that patellar dislocation can occur is when the trochlear groove that has been completely flattened is defined as trochlear dysplasia. Not having a groove because the trochlear bone has flattened out can cause the patella to slide because nothing is holding the patella in place. Two types of treatment options are typically available: Surgery may impede normal growth of structures in the knee, so doctors generally do not recommend knee operations for youth who are still growing. There are also risks of complications, like an adverse reaction to anesthesia or an infection. When designing a rehabilitation program, clinicians consider associated injuries such as chipped bones or soft tissue tears. Clinicians will take into account the patient's age, activity level, and time needed to return to work and/or athletics. Doctors generally only recommend surgery when other structures in the knee have sustained severe damage, or specifically when there is: Supplements like glucosamine and NSAIDs can be used to keep the knee strong. An effective rehabilitation program reduces the chances of reinjury or any other knee-related problems like patellofemoral pain syndrome or osteoarthritis. Rehabilitation focuses on maintaining strength and range of motion to reduce pain and maintain the health of the muscles and tissues around the knee joint. The patella is a floating sesamoid bone that is held in place by the quadriceps muscle tendon and patellar tendon ligament. Exercises should include strengthening quadriceps muscles such as rectus femoris, vastus intermedius, and vastus lateralis. However, tight and strong lateral quadriceps can be an underlying cause of a patella dislocation. If this is the underlying cause it is recommended to strengthen the medial quadriceps, vastus medialis (VMO), and stretch the lateral muscles. Exercises to strengthen quadriceps muscles include but not limited to, squats, and lunges. Adding extra external support around the knee by using devices such as knee [orthotics] or athletic tape can help prevent patellar dislocation and other knee related injuries. External support such as braces and applying athletic tape work by providing movement in only desired planes and helps hinder movements that cause abnormal movement and potentially cause injuries. Women who wear high heels tend to develop short calf muscles and tendons. Exercises to stretch and strengthen calf muscles are recommended on a daily basis. 
