 The Pediatric Cancer Research Foundation (PCRF) was founded in 1982 in order to improve the quality of life of children with cancer and increase the rate of survival. Twenty years ago the survival rate for children with Leukemia was 50%. Now, with the help of this organization and many others, the survival rate stands at 85%. The foundation's headquarters are in Irvine, California. In 1982, the PCRF, founded and under the guidance of Dr. Mitchell Cairo, opened its first facility. In 1983, the laboratory, researchers, and equipment all increased to twice their numbers. In 1984, the laboratory increased to . In 1985-86, the Bone marrow transplant laboratory opened, with sterilized hoods, and a computerized, liquid nitrogen freezer to store samples. In 1987, the lab was relocated to a facility. Through the next few years the PCRF moved into the areas of immuno-oncology research and molecular and cellular biology research. In 1992, the facility was again relocated to a facility with all of the state of the art technology. Through the next couple years, the PCRF began to launch research in the areas of immunotherapy and stem cell biology. In 1994, the result of many years of research produced the first successful umbilical cord blood transplant. In 1996, from the 25 research investigators there are 46 manuscripts and abstracts that were accepted for publication. Dr. Cairo was awarded two contracts from the National Institute of Health/Heart, Lung & Blood Institute for the establishment of an Umbilical Cord Blood Bank and Umbilical Cord Blood Transplant Center. In 1997, the PCRF Laboratory was relocated to Georgetown University’s Lombardi Cancer Center. Due to the guidance of Dr. Cairo, this laboratory became one of the largest and most prestigious in the country. In 1999, Dr. Cairo performed the first ex-vivo cord blood transplant at Georgetown University Lombardi Cancer Center. In 2000 the PCRF was moved, yet again, to Babies and Children’s Hospital and the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia University, New York. In 2001 the PCRF had 5 member institutions, around 73 approved consortium clinical research protocols, and 172 patients involved in the Consortium studies. In 2002, the PCRF Laboratory at Children’s Hospital of New York was increased to over . The first international Symposium on Childhood and Adolescent Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma was held in New York, and was sponsored by Columbia University and Justus-Liebig-University Giessen. In 2004, the PCRF registered its 1,000th patient in the Consortium studies. In 2005, the PCRF lab at Columbia University reported the critical differences in cord blood compared to adult peripheral blood regulatory T-cells that may account for the significantly different responses after cord blood transplantation. Research funded by PCRF is conducted at: In order to encourage others to join in the struggle against cancer, the PCRF awards grants to areas that can further the field in any way. The PCRF currently awards grants in the following categories of research: PCRF has raised over 20 million dollars for pediatric cancer research. These contributions were donated by individuals, charities, and businesses. Over 80 percent of all donations to PCRF go directly to research, as a result of the dedication of a large team of volunteers. Their major sponsors (giving $10,000 or more) for the year 2005 are:1 
