 Pentobarbital (US English) or pentobarbitone (UK English) is a short-acting barbiturate that was first synthesized in 1928. Pentobarbital can occur as as both a free acid and salts such as sodium and calcium. The free acid is only slightly soluble in water and ethanol. One brand name for this drug is Nembutal, coined by Dr. John S. Lundy, who started using it in 1930, from the structural formula of the sodium salt—Na (sodium) + ethyl + methyl + butyl + al (common suffix for barbiturates). Typical applications for pentobarbital are sedative, hypnotic for short term, preanesthetic and control of convulsions in emergencies. It is also used as a veterinary anesthetic agent. Pentobarbital also has an application in reducing intracranial pressure in Reye's syndrome, traumatic brain injury and induction of coma in cerebral ischemia patients. Pentobarbital-induced coma has been advocated in patients with acute liver failure refractory to mannitol. Pentobarbital can induce death when used in high doses. It is used for euthanasia for humans as well as animals. It is also used by itself, or in combination with complementary agents such as phenytoin, in commercial animal euthanasia injectable solutions. In the Netherlands, the standard protocol for physician-assisted suicide is intravenously induced thiopental anesthesia, followed by bromide of alcuronium or pancuronium induced respiratory arrest. A concentrated oral solution of 100 ml containing 9 grams of pentobarbital sodium along with sugar syrup in a 20% ethanol solution is a standard solution used for self administration by patient. (Dutch) The dosage of pentobarbital indicated for physical assisted suicide in Oregon, US is typically 10g in liquid form Pentobarbital is considered as the substitute to traditionally used pharmaceuticals by some State government of United States for execution due to a shortage in supply. The US state of Texas executed its first death row inmate with a single lethal injection of the sedative pentobarbital on July 18, 2012. The sole use of Pentobarbital in U.S is set to become more widespread after several states, including Ohio, Arizona, Idaho and Washington made the decision to switch following shortages of the Pancuronium bromide, a muscle relaxant previously used as one component in a 3-drug cocktail. Pentobarbital undergoes first-pass metabolism in the liver and possibly the intestines. Administration of alcohol, opioids, antihistamines, other sedative-hypnotics, and other central nervous system depressants will cause possible additive effects. Pentobarbital is a drug that has been used recreationally. Pentobarbital is synthesized by methods analogous to that of amobarbital, the only difference being that the alkylation of α-ethylmalonic ester is carried out with 2-bromopentane (not 1-bromo-3-methylbutane) to give pentobarbital. 
