 Perfume intolerance is a condition wherein people exhibit sensitivity or allergic reations to ingredients in perfume. The most common allergic reactions to perfume or fragrances added to products is contact dermatitis, although other symptoms may occur, including allergic conjunctivitis. However, two studies show that inhalant like allergies and sensitivity/intolerances are experienced by a subset of the US population, in the form of asthma and chemical sensitivities. Results aggregated from both surveys found that 30.5% of the general populationreported scented products on others irritating, 19% reported adverse health effects from air fresheners, and 10.9% reported irritation by scented laundry products vented outside. This study reveals that a considerable percentage of the U.S. population reports adverse health effects or irritation from fragranced products, with higher percentages among those with asthma and chemical sensitivity. As with all allergies, there is a difference between hypersensitivity and true allergy. Many claiming to be allergic to perfumes are not allergic, but hypersensitive towards perfumes. True allergy is an immunological overreaction which is specific at a molecular level to a certain substance. A perfume contains thousands of different substances. A person is not likely to have a true allergy towards all perfumes, unless it is towards a common ingredient. Hypersensitivity is usually a feeling of discomfort towards solvents, involving sore feeling and itching in nose, mouth, and throat and hypersecretion of nasal mucus and saliva. Immunological mechanisms may or may not be involved, but are not detectable by current methods. The nose and sense of smell is evolutionarily very important. How smell interacts with other cerebral function in higher animals is not fully understood. For certain, complex psychosomatic mechanisms not fully understood are involved in perfume hypersensitivity. However, medical research suggest that some patients have a physical reaction, in particular asthmatics and those with chemical sensitivities to particular fragrance chemicals Household products, such as soaps and detergents, perfume products, cosmetics, and other consumer goods, are estimated to use 2500 different fragrance ingredients. Of those, approximately 100 different substances are known to elicit responses in at least some individuals. An estimated 1.7-4.1% of the general population shows a contact allergic response to a mix of common perfume ingredients. Although products can be labeled "fragrance-free", many still contain lesser-known fragrance chemicals that consumers may not recognize. Cinnamaldehyde (cinnamic aldehyde) is a common fragrance allergen. 
