 Phineas P. Gage (1823–1860) was an American rail­road con­struc­tion fore­man now remem­bered for his im­prob­a­ble sur­vival of an accident in which a large iron rod was driven com­plete­ly through his head, destroy­ing much of his brain's left front­al lobe, and for that injury's re­port­ed effects on his per­son­al­ity and behav­ior, effects so profound—at least for a time—that friends saw him as "no longer Gage". Long called "the American Crowbar Case"—once termed "the case which more than all others is calc­u­lat­ed to ex­cite our won­der, im­pair the val­ue of prog­no­sis, and even to sub­vert our phys­i­ol­og­ical doctrines"—Phineas Gage in­flu­enced nine­teenth-century dis­cus­sion about the mind and brain, par­tic­u­lar­ly debate on ce­re­bral local­iz­ation, and was perhaps the first case sug­gest­ing that damage to spe­cif­ic parts of the brain might affect per­sonality. Gage is a fixture in the curricula of neurology, psychology and related disciplines, and is freq­uent­ly mentioned in books and academic papers; he even has a minor place in pop­u­lar culture. Despite this celebrity the body of established fact about Gage and what he was like (whether before or after his accident) is remarkably small, which has allowed "the fitting of almost any theory to the small number of facts we have"—Gage having been cited, over the years, by proponents of various theories of the brain wholly con­tra­dic­to­ry to one another. A survey of published accounts of Gage, including scientific ones, has found that they are almost always severely distorted—exaggerating the known facts when not directly con­tra­dict­ing them. A daguerreotype portrait of Gage—"handsome ... well dressed and confident, even proud," and holding the tamping iron which injured him—was identified in 2009. One re­search­er points to it as con­sistent with a social recovery hypothesis, under which Gage's most serious mental changes may have existed for only a limited time after the accident, so that in later life he was far more functional, and socially far better adapted, than pre­vi­ously thought. A second portrait (see below) came to light in 2010. __TOC__ On September 13, 1848 twenty-five-year-old Gage was foreman of a work gang blasting rock while preparing the road­bed for the Rutland & Burlington Railroad outside the town of Cavendish, Vermont. Setting a blast involved boring a hole deep into a body of rock; add­ing blasting powder, a fuse, and sand; then compacting this charge into the hole using a tamping iron—a large iron rod. Gage was doing this around 4:30 PM when (possibly because the sand was omit­ted) the iron struck a spark against the rock and Nineteenth-century references to Gage as "the American Crowbar Case" bear clar­if­i­ca­tion. Gage's tamping iron did not have the bend or claw sometimes associated with the term crowbar; rather it was simply a cylinder, "round and rendered comparatively smooth by use": Weighing  pounds (6 kg) this "abrupt and intrusive visitor" landed some 80 feet (25 m) away, "smeared with blood and brain." To the astonishment of his men Gage spoke within a few minutes, walked with little assistance, and sat upright in an oxcart for the -mile (1.2 km) ride to his lodgings in town. The first physician to see him was Dr. Edward H. Williams: Dr. John Martyn Harlow took charge of the case about an hour later: Despite Harlow's skillful care, Gage's recuperation was long and difficult. Pressure on the brain left him semi-comatose from September 23 to October 3, "seldom speaking unless spoken to, and then answering only in mono­syllables. The friends and attendants are in hourly expectancy of his death, and have his coffin and clothes in readiness." But on October 7 Gage "succeeded in raising himself up, and took one step to his chair." One month later he was walking "up and down stairs, and about the house, into the piazza," and while Harlow was absent for a week, Gage was "in the street every day except Sunday," his desire to return to his family in New Hampshire being "uncontrollable by his friends ... got wet feet and a chill." He soon developed a fever, but by mid-November he was "feeling better in every respect ... walking about the house again; says he feels no pain in the head." Harlow's prognosis at this point: Gage "appears to be in a way of recov­er­ing, if he can be controlled." By November 25 Gage was strong enough to return to his parents' home in Lebanon, New Hampshire, where by late Dec­em­ber he was "riding out, improving both mentally and physically." In April 1849 he returned to Cavendish and paid a visit to Har­low, who noted at that time loss of vision (and ptosis) of the left eye, a large scar on the forehead, and "upon the top of the head ... a deep depression, two inches by one and one-half inches wide, beneath which the pulsations of the brain can be per­ceived. Partial paralysis of the left side of the face." Despite all this, "his physical health is good, and I am inclined to say he has recovered. Has no pain in head, but says it has a queer feeling which he is not able to describe." Unable to return to his railroad work, Harlow says, Gage appeared for a time at Barnum's American Museum in New York City (the cu­ri­ous paying to see, presumably, both Gage and the instrument which had injured him) although there is no indep­end­­ent con­fir­ma­tion of this. Recently, however, evidence has surfaced supporting Harlow's state­ment that Gage made public appear­ances in "the larger New England towns". (On Gage's job-loss and public ap­pear­ances, see more below.) He later worked in a livery stable in Hanover, New Hampshire. In August of 1852 Gage was invited to Chile to work as a long-distance stagecoach driver there, "caring for horses, and often driving a coach heavily laden and drawn by six horses" on the Valparaiso–Santiago route. After his health began to fail around 1859, he left Chile for San Francisco, where he recovered under the care of his mother and sister (who had gone there from New Hampshire around the time Gage went to Chile). For the next few months he did farm work in Santa Clara. In February 1860 Gage had the first in a series of increasingly severe convulsions, and he died in or near San Francisco on May 21—just under twelve years after his injury. He was buried in San Francisco's Lone Mountain Cemetery. In 1866 Harlow, who had "lost all trace of [Gage], and had well nigh abandoned all expectation of ever hearing from him again", somehow learned that Gage had died in California and opened a correspondence with his family there. At Harlow's request they exhumed Gage's remains long enough to remove his skull, which was then delivered to Harlow back in New England. About a year after the accident, Gage had allowed his tamping iron to be placed in Harvard Medical School's Warren Anatomical Museum, but he later reclaimed it, and made what he called "my iron bar" his "constant companion during the remainder of his life"; now it accompanied the skull on its journey to Harlow. After studying them for a triumphal retrospective paper on Gage (1868) Harlow redeposited the iron—this time with Gage's skull—in the Warren Museum, where they remain on display today. The iron bears this inscription: Much later Gage's headless remains were moved to Cypress Lawn Cemetery as part of a systematic relocation of San Francisco's dead to new burial places outside city limits. Significant brain injury is often fatal, but Harlow called Gage "the man for the case. His physique, will, and capacity of endurance could scarcely be excelled," and as noted earlier the iron's 1/4-inch leading point may have reduced its de­struc­tive­ness. Nonetheless, the brain tissue destroyed must have been substantial (considering not only the initial trauma but the subsequent infection as well) though debate as to whether this was in both frontal lobes, or primarily the left, began with the earliest papers by physicians who had examined Gage. The 1994 conclusion of H. Damasio et al. that both frontal lobes were damaged was drawn by modeling not Gage's skull but a "Gage-like" one; but Ratiu et al. (2004, based on CT scans of Gage's actual skull, and presenting a video re­con­struc­tion of the tamping iron passing through it) confirm Harlow's conclusion, based on probing Gage's wounds with his finger, that the right hemi­sphere remained intact. Van Horn et al. (2012) concur that the right hemi­sphere was undamaged and make detailed estimates of the locus and extent of damage to Gage's white matter, suggesting that the role of this damage in Gage's mental changes may have been more significant than that of cerebral cortex (grey matter) damage. Without question Gage displayed some kind of change in behavior after his accident, but the nature, extent, and duration of this change are very uncertain. In fact little is known about what Gage was like either before or after his injury (almost none of it first-hand), the mental changes described after his death were much more dramatic than anything reported while he was alive, and the very few descriptions which seem credible do not specify the period of his post-accident life to which they are meant to apply. In his 1848 report, as Gage was just completing his physical recovery, Harlow had only hinted at possible psychological symptoms: "The mental manifestations of the patient, I leave to a future com­mun­i­cat­ion. I think the case ... is exceedingly interesting to the enlightened physiologist and intellectual philosopher." And after observing Gage for several weeks in late 1849, Henry Jacob Bigelow, Professor of Surgery at Harvard, went so far as to say that Gage was "quite recovered in faculties of body and mind," there being "inconsiderable disturbance of function". It was twenty years later that Harlow, having obtained Gage's skull and the history of his last years, described the mental changes found today in most presentations of the case (though usually in ex­ag­ger­at­ed or dis­tort­ed form—see below). In memorable language he described the pre-accident Gage as hard-working, responsible, and "a great favorite" with the men in his charge, his employers having regarded him as "the most efficient and capable foreman in their employ". But these same employers, after Gage's accident, "considered the change in his mind so marked that they could not give him his place again": This oft-quoted description appears to draw on Harlow's own notes set down soon after the accident, but other behaviors he describes appear to draw on later com­mun­i­cat­ions from Gage's friends or family, and it is difficult to match these various behaviors (which range widely in their implied level of functional im­pair­ment) to the par­tic­u­lar period of Gage's life during which each described behavior was present. This complicates recon­struc­tion of what Gage was like at various points in his post-accident life, a critical task in light of evidence (see below) that his behavior at the end of his life was very different from his behavior immediately after the accident—the behavior described above. Psychologist Malcolm Macmillan, in his book An Odd Kind of Fame: Stories of Phineas Gage (the only book-length treat­ment of the case) surveys scores of accounts of Gage, both sci­en­tif­ic and pop­ular, show­ing that they almost always dis­tort and ex­ag­ger­ate his be­hav­ior­al changes well beyond any­thing described by those who had actual contact with Gage or even with his family. Attributes typically ascribed to the post-accident Gage which are either unsup­port­ed by, or in con­tra­dic­tion to, the known facts in­clude mis­treatment of wife and child­ren (of which Gage had nei­ther), inap­pro­pri­ate sex­u­al behavior, an "utter lack of foresight", "a vainglorious tendency to show off his wound", inability or refusal to hold a job, plus drink­ing, brag­ging, ly­ing, gambl­ing, brawl­ing, bully­ing, and thiev­ery. Mac­millan's detailed analysis shows that none of these behaviors is mentioned by anyone who had actually met Gage or his family. A. Damasio misinterprets a passage by Harlow—... continued to work in various places;' could not do much, chang­­ing often, 'and always finding something that did not suit him in every place he tried—as implying Gage could not hold a job after his accident. In fact Harlow's words refer not to Gage's post-accident life in general, but only to the months just before his death, after con­vul­sions had set in. Until that point Gage had supported himself, throughout his adult life, at honest hard work. Harlow himself, writing in 1868 while in contact with Gage's mother, somehow mistakes the year of Gage's death as 1861, where­as funeral records show he actually died in 1860—a striking illustration of the difficulty of establishing even basic fact about the case. In another example, it is often said that Gage's iron was buried with him, but there appears to be no ev­i­dence for this. Beyond the importance of correcting the record of a much-cited case, Mac­millan writes, "Phineas' story is worth remembering be­cause it illustrates how easily a small stock of facts becomes transformed into popular and scientific myth," the paucity of evi­dence having allowed "the fitting of almost any theory to the small number of facts we have". A similar concern was expressed as far back as 1877, when British neurologist David Ferrier, writing to America in an attempt "to have this case definitely settled," complained that "In investigating reports on diseases and injuries of the brain, I am constantly amazed at the inexactitude and distortion to which they are subject by men who have some pet theory to support. The facts suffer so frightfully." Thus in the nineteenth-century controversy over whether or not the various mental functions are localized in specific regions of the brain, both sides found ways to cite Gage in support of their theories; for example, while Ferrier (1878) cited Gage as evidence that the brain is localized, Dupuy (1877) used him as proof that it is not. Phrenologists made use of Gage as well, claiming that his mental changes resulted from destruction of his "organ of Veneration" and/or the adjacent "organ of Benevolence". It is often said that what happened to Gage played a part in the later development of various forms of psychosurgery, par­tic­u­lar­ly frontal lobotomy. Aside from the question of why the unpleasant changes usually (if erroneously) attributed to Gage would inspire surgical imitation, careful inquiry turns up no such link according to Mac­millan: In 2008 an advertisement for a pre­vi­ous­ly unknown public appearance by Gage was discovered, as well as a report of his physical and mental condition during his time in Chile, a description of what may well have been his daily work routine there as a stagecoach driver, and more recently an ad for a second public appearance. This new evidence implies that the seriously maladapted Gage described by Harlow existed for only a limited time after the accident—that Gage eventually "figured out how to live" despite his injury, and was in later life far more functional, and socially far better adapted, than pre­vi­ous­ly thought. Macmillan hypothesizes that this change represents a social recovery undergone by Gage over time, citing per­sons with similar injuries for whom "someone or something gave enough struc­ture to their lives for them to relearn lost social and per­son­al skills" (in Gage's case, his highly struc­tured employment in Chile). If this is so, he points out, then along with theoretical implications it "would add to current evidence that rehabilitation can be effective even in difficult and long-standing cases"—and if Gage could achieve such improvement without medical supervision, "what are the limits for those in formal rehabilitation programs?" In 2009 a daguerreotype portrait of Gage was identified—the first likeness of him identified other than a life mask taken around 1850. It shows "a disfigured yet still-handsome" Gage with one eye closed and scars clearly visible, "well dressed and confident, even proud" and holding his iron, on which portions of the inscription (recited above) can be made out. (For decades the da­guerre­o­type's owners had imagined that it showed an injured whaler with his harpoon.) Authenticity was confirmed in several ways, including photo-overlaying the inscription visible in the portrait against that on the actual tamping iron in Harvard's Warren Anatomical Museum, and matching the injuries seen in the portrait against those preserved in the life mask. Macmillan cites the daguerre­o­type as consistent with the social recovery hypothesis already described. To better understand the question, he and collaborators are actively seeking additional evidence on Gage's life and behavior, and describe certain kinds of historical material (see "Phineas Gage: Unanswered questions" in External links, below) for which they hope readers will remain alert, such as letters or diaries by physicians whom their re­search indicates Gage may have met, or by per­sons in certain places Gage seems to have been. In 2010 a second portrait of Gage was identified. This new image, copies of which are in the possession of at least two different branches of the Gage family, depicts the same subject seen in the Wilgus da­guerre­o­type identified in 2009, according to Gage re­search­ers consulted by the Smithsonian Institution. Further reading (and viewing) for general audiences For specialists Other works cited Minor additional sources are given in the Notes and References (above). 
