 POLST (Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment) is a controversial approach to improving end-of-life care in the United States which seeks to doctors to speak with patients and create specific medical orders to be honored by health care workers during a medical crisis. POLST began in Oregon in 1991 and is currently promoted in over 26 states through national and statewide initiatives. The POLST document is a standardized, portable, brightly colored single page form which documents a conversation between a doctor and a seriously ill patient or their surrogate decision-maker. As a medical order, the POLST form is always signed by a doctor and, depending upon the state, the patient. One benefit of a POLST form over a standard Advance Directive is that the POLST form is designed to be actionable throughout an entire community. It is immediately recognizable and can be used by doctors and first responders (including paramedics, fire departments, police, emergency rooms, hospitals and nursing homes). POLST forms should be filled out for all patients with life-limiting illnesses or progressive frailty. A pragmatic rule for initiating a POLST can be if the clinician would not be surprised if the patient were to die within one year. POLST orders are also known by other names: medical orders on life-sustaining treatment (MOLST), medical orders on scope of treatment (MOST), or physician’s orders on scope of treatment (POST). POLST represents a significant paradigm change in advance care policy by standardizing provider communications through a plan of care in a portable way, rather than focusing solely on standardizing patients’ communications via Advance Directives. The POLST paradigm requires providers and patients or their surrogates to accomplish three core tasks: To determine whether a POLST form should be completed, clinicians should ask themselves, “Would I be surprised if this person died in the next year?” If the answer is that the patient’s prognosis is one year or less, then a POLST form is appropriate. In a 2006 consensus report, the National Quality Form observed that “compared with other advance directive programs, POLST more accurately conveys end-of-life preferences and yields higher adherence by medical professionals.” The National Quality Forum and other experts have recommended nationwide implementation of the POLST Paradigm Unlike advance directives, a POLST summarizes the patients’ wishes in the form of physician orders for end-of-life care. POLST provides explicit guidance to health professionals under predictable future circumstances. POLST can build on an advance directive but can also function in the absence of an advance directive. If the individual lacks decisional capacity, a surrogate can engage in the conversation and the consent process that forms the basis of the POLST process. The challenges that patients, families and their healthcare professionals face at the end of life can be daunting. Caring and sensitive communication can elicit patients’ wishes which can then be documented in an advance directive. To put these preferences into actionable orders requires an additional tool, the POLST form. Healthcare professionals and their organizations can overcome the myriad barriers to communication across systems of care by developing a POLST program, creating a method that respects some of the most deeply held values of patients. Susan Tolle M.D. and Patrick Dunn, M.D. are faculty at OHSU’s Center for Ethics in Health Care and provide support to those who wish to spread Oregon’s POLST Paradigm to other states. Core features of successful programs include the robust ongoing training and education of health professionals. Communication skills and a commitment to improving end-of-life care are needed to implement POLST in a patient-centered, meaningful way. Ongoing monitoring, quality improvement and further research is critical to expand and improve the POLST process. References: 
