 A pill organizer, pill container, or pill box is a special container for storing scheduled doses of one's medications. Pill organizers usually have square shaped compartments for each day of the week, although other discreet forms have come to market in recent times, including cylindrical and pen-shaped cases. Some have sections for different times of the day. Pill organizers are viewed as a way to prevent or reduce medication errors on the part of the patient. Pill organizers are useful for all types of patients, including the elderly and others with memory deficiencies, and for those taking multiple medications as an aid in remembering to take proper doses of their medications. They allow a patient to know whether or not they have taken a particular dose of their medication, since if a pill still remains in its compartment, it shows that it has not been taken, whereas if it is missing, it has been taken. Pill organizers often have various features that make them easier for those with special needs to use, such as color-coding, braille for the blind, or a locking mechanism to prevent double dosing. Some used for diabetes patients have sections for insulin and syringes. Some pharmacists will place pills in pill organizers for their patients. Some pill organizers have alarms to alert patients when doses need to be taken. More recently, electronic pill organizers have been invented that alert patients when their medication must be taken. These have been credited with saving lives and saving a lot of money in the health care system. These can be linked via the internet to a medical facility to aid in reminding a patient to take his/her medications. Pill organizers are commonly used to serve medical purposes, but it is also used to help individuals, be that the elderly or chronically ill, take their prescription medication, OTC medication or daily supplements at a given date and time. There are "telehealth" products in the health care industry such as automated or electronic pill boxes that function to alert the patients when it is time to take their medications. The only drawback is of cost. Electronic Pillboxes are costly to purchase and maintain. Not everybody can afford pillboxes with an electronic alarm and SMS reminder system. The service providers generally provide buyers with 2 to 3 months free service after which they are charged on a yearly or quarterly basis. In an effort to make pill organizers more stylish and fashionable, manufacturers have begun marketing pill bags. These bags save the medicine-dependent from embarrassment and seek to make users feel better about their pill taking in social situations or when traveling. 
