 Pontiac fever is an acute, non-fatal respiratory disease caused by various species of gram negative bacteria in the genus Legionella. It causes a mild upper respiratory infection that resembles acute influenza. The infectious process is known commonly as legionellosis. It can induce pneumonia and is known to often have spontaneous resolution often goes undiagnosed. Pontiac fever was named for Pontiac, Michigan where the first case was recognized. In 1968, several workers at the county's department of health came down with a fever and mild flu symptoms, but not pneumonia. After the 1976 Legionnaires' outbreak in Philadelphia, the Michigan health department reexamined blood samples and discovered the workers had been infected with the newly identified Legionella pneumophila. Since that time, other species of Legionella that cause Pontiac fever have been identified, most notably in New Zealand, in 2007 where Legionella longbeachae was discovered. The New Zealand outbreak also marked the first time Pontiac fever had been traced to potting soil. Species of Legionella known to cause Pontiac fever include Legionella pneumophila, Legionella longbeachae, Legionella feeleii, Legionella micdadei and Legionella anisa. Pontiac fever is known to have a short incubation period between 1 to 3 days. No fatalities have been reported and some cases have resolved spontaneously without treatment. It is often not reported. Age, gender and smoking do not seem to be risk factors. Pontiac fever seems to affect young people in the age medians of 29, 30, and 32. Pathogenesis of the Pontiac fever is poorly known. Sources of the causative agents are aquatic systems and potting soil. The first outbreak caused by inhalation of aersolized potting soil was discovered in New Zealand in January 2007. A total of ten workers at a nursery came down with Pontiac fever. It was the first identification of Legionella longbeachae. Pontiac fever does not spread from person to person. It is acquired through aersolization of water droplets and/or potting soil containing amoeba. 
