 Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction (POCD) is a decline in cognitive function for weeks or months after surgery. POCD is common after cardiac surgery, and recent studies have now verified that POCD also exists after major non-cardiac surgery, although at a lower incidence. The risk of POCD increases with age, and the type of surgery is also important because there is a very low incidence associated with minor surgery. Cognitive dysfunction is common in adult patients of all ages at hospital discharge after major noncardiac surgery, but only the elderly (aged 60 yr or older) are at significant risk for long-term cognitive problems. Patients with POCD are at an increased risk of death in the first year after surgery. Research interest has increased since early 2000, especially as more elderly patients are able to undergo successful minor and major surgeries. POCD has been studied through various institutions since the inception of the IPOCDS-I study centred in Eindhoven, Netherlands and Copenhagen, Denmark. This study found no causal relationship between hypoxia and low blood pressure and POCD. Age, duration of anaesthesia, introperative complications, and postoperative infections were found to be associated with POCD. The body's inflammatory response to surgery likely plays an important role, at least in elderly patients. Various research initiatives during recent years have evaluated whether actions taken before, during and after surgery can lessen the possible deleterious effects of inflammation. For example, anti-inflammatory agents can be given before surgery. During surgery, inflammation can be modulated by temperature control, use of regional rather than general anesthesia or the use of beta-blockers. After surgery, closer attention should be paid to optimal pain management and infection control. Animal studies indicate that volatile anaesthestics may augment the pathological processes of Alzheimer's Disease by affecting amyloid-beta processing. In young healthy mice however, the volatile anesthetic isoflurane can also produce long-lasting memory impairment; an effect that is preventable by pre-administering the GABA(A)α5 inverse agonist L-655,708. Several studies have shown variable-significance positive effects when a multidisciplinary, multifactorial approach to elderly patient is followed during pre, peri and post-operative care. 
