 Prehospital ultrasound is the specialized application of ultrasound by emergency responders, such as paramedics, to guide immediate care and first aid procedures. Like conventional ultrasound, it is a device that produces cyclic sound pressure to penetrate a medium (usually flesh, in this instance) and reveal details about the inner structure of the medium. Many emergency physicians now view screening ultrasound as a tool, and not a procedure or study. It is primarily used to quickly and correctly ascertain a limited set of internal injuries, specifically those injuries where conventional methods of determining them, such as trauma to the torso or heart, would either take too long, require too much time to prepare, or introduce greater risk to the patient. While conventional ultrasound can be a lengthy process, and is usually conducted with non-mobile units and advanced image filtering and manipulation built into the unit, emergency ultrasound is as simple and quick to operate as possible, and narrowly focused on a small set of criteria. Indications for the use of prehospital ultrasound are determining the severity of trauma to the midsection, determining immediate trauma or penetration of the heart, and to process sources and extent of internal bleeding. Specific implementations vary, some areas use the German originated FAST scan system which focuses on fluids in the paracolic gutter and the Douglas and Morrison pouch. Others focus more on cardiac ultrasounds. As a part of the FAST exam, it is common for the examiner to quickly image the sliding lung against the chest wall to rule out pneumothorax. If the visceral and parietal lung have separated, the lung sliding will disappear indicating a probable pneumothorax. If lung sliding is seen, there is no significant pneumothorax. This simple addition to the FAST exam can accurately identify lung collapse in only 1 additional minute. This Enhanced FAST exam is often called EFAST. Another useful indication is assessing intravascular volume by looking directly at the inferior vena cava (IVC). Large IVCs that don't collapse during inspiration suggest that there is plenty of blood returning to the heart. Cardiac imaging can give the provider a sense of ejection fraction and heart function. Patients with pulmonary embolism can have a markedly enlarged right ventricle during the event, giving additional clues to the provider for correct diagnosis and treatment. As time goes on, it is likely that there will be dozens of additional indications for field use. In most cases, prehospital providers will employ the use of a portable ultrasound unit. In every instance, an attempt is made to find the area best suited to an ultrasound and utilize bare skin if possible. Resolution is vastly decreased if soundings must be made through any form of clothing. There are two main areas of emergency ultrasound. The Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (or fast) focuses on trying to ascertain if there is internal bodily fluid in blunt abdominal trauma, in the areas between organs, which is a sign of severe internal injury. Echocardiography is used to attempt to find valvular disease, clots, cardiomyopathies or penetrations of the heart. Both systems are scanning methodologies, they use identical equipment. 
