 Prenatal or antenatal development is the process in which a human embryo or fetus (or foetus) gestates during pregnancy, from fertilization until birth. Often, the terms fetal development, foetal development, or embryology are used in a similar sense. After fertilization the embryogenesis starts. In humans, when embryogenesis finishes, by the end of the 10th week of gestational age, the precursors of all the major organs of the body have been created. Therefore, the following period, the fetal period, is described both topically on one hand, i.e. by organ, and strictly chronologically on the other, by a list of major occurrences by weeks of gestational age. When semen is deposited in the vagina, the spermatozoa travel through the cervix and body of the uterus and into the Fallopian tubes. Fertilization of the ovum (egg cell) usually takes place in the Fallopian tube. Many sperm must cooperate to penetrate the thick protective shell-like barrier that surrounds the ovum. The first sperm that penetrates fully into the egg donates its genetic material (DNA). The egg then polarizes, repelling any additional sperm. The resulting combination is called a zygote, a new and genetically unique human organism. The term "conception" refers variably to either fertilization or to formation of the conceptus after uterine implantation, and this terminology is controversial. Prior to fertilization, each ovum contains a complete human genome, including a single X but no Y chromosome. Likewise, each spermatozoon contains a complete set of autosomes and a single sex chromosome, either X or Y. The resulting human zygote is similar to the majority of somatic cells because it contains two copies of the genome in a diploid set of chromosomes. One set of chromosomes came from the nucleus of the ovum and the second set from the nucleus of the sperm. The zygote is male if the egg is fertilized by a sperm that carries a Y chromosome, and it is female if the egg is fertilized by a sperm that carries an X chromosome. Unlike the X chromosome, the Y chromosome contains very little genetic information. However it does contain a gene, SRY, which will switch on androgen production at a later stage, leading to the development of a male body type. In contrast, the mitochondrial genetic information of the zygote comes entirely from the mother via the ovum. The embryonic period in humans begins at fertilization (penetration of the egg by the sperm) and continues until the end of the 10th week of gestation (8th week by embryonic age). The embryo spends the next few days traveling down the Fallopian tube. It starts out as a single cell zygote and then divides several times to form a ball of cells called a morula. Further cellular division is accompanied by the formation of a small cavity between the cells. This stage is called a blastocyst. Up to this point there is no growth in the overall size of the embryo, as it is confined within a glycoprotein shell, known as the zona pellucida. Instead, each division produces successively smaller cells. The blastocyst reaches the uterus at roughly the fifth day after fertilization. It is here that lysis of the zona pellucida occurs. This process is analogous to zona hatching, a term that refers to the emergence of the blastocyst from the zona pellucida, when incubated in vitro. This allows the trophectoderm cells of the blastocyst to come into contact with, and adhere to, the endometrial cells of the uterus. The trophectoderm will eventually give rise to extra-embryonic structures, such as the placenta and the membranes. The embryo becomes embedded in the endometrium in a process called implantation. In most successful pregnancies, the embryo implants 8 to 10 days after ovulation (Wilcox et al. 1999). The embryo, the extra-embryonic membranes, and the placenta are collectively referred to as a conceptus, or the "products of conception". Rapid growth occurs and the embryo's main external features begin to take form. This process is called differentiation, which produces the varied cell types (such as blood cells, kidney cells, and nerve cells). A spontaneous abortion, or miscarriage, in the first trimester of pregnancy is usually due to major genetic mistakes or abnormalities in the developing embryo. During this critical period (most of the first trimester), the developing embryo is also susceptible to toxic exposures, such as: Generally, if a structure pre-dates another structure in evolutionary terms, then it often appears earlier than the other in an embryo; this general observation is sometimes summarized by the phrase "ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny." For example, the backbone is a common structure among all vertebrates such as fish, reptiles and mammals, and the backbone also appears as one of the earliest structures laid out in all vertebrate embryos. The cerebrum in humans, which is the most sophisticated part of the brain, develops last. The concept of recapitulation is not absolute, but it is recognized as being partly applicable to development of the human embryo. Gestational age is the time that has passed since the onset of the last menstruation, which generally or as standard occurs 2 weeks before the actual fertilization. Embryonic age, in contrast measures the actual age of the embryo or fetus from the time of fertilization. Nevertheless, menstruation has historically been the only means of estimating embryonal/fetal age, and is still the presumed measure if not else specified. However, the actual duration between last menstruation and fertilization may in fact differ from the standard 2 weeks by several days. Thus, the first week of embryonic age is already week three counting with gestational age. Furthermore, the number of the week is one more than the actual age of the embryo/fetus. For example, the embryo is 0 whole weeks old during the 1st week after fertilization. The following table summarizes the various expression systems during week number x of gestation. Week 1–2 of gestational age are theoretical extrapolations of embryonic age, since the fertilization hasn't actually occurred yet. Gestational age: 0 weeks and 0 days until to 1 week and 6 days old. 1–14 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: -2 to -1 weeks old. Gestational age: 2 weeks and 0 days until 2 weeks and 6 days old. 15–21 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 1. 0 (whole) weeks old. 1–7 days from fertilization. Gestational age: 3 weeks and 0 days until 3 weeks and 6 days old. 22–28 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 2. 1 week old. 8–14 days from fertilization. Gestational age: 4 weeks and 0 days until 4 weeks and 6 days old. 29–35 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 3. 2 weeks old. 15–21 days from fertilization. Gestational age: 5 weeks and 0 days until 5 weeks and 6 days old. 36–42 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 4. 3 weeks old. 22–28 days from fertilization.. Gestational age: 6 weeks and 0 days until 6 weeks and 6 days old. 43–49 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 5. 4 weeks old. 29–35 days from fertilization. Gestational age: 7 weeks and 0 days until 7 weeks and 6 days old. 50–56 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 6. 5 weeks old. 36–42 days from fertilization. Gestational age: 8 weeks and 0 days until 8 weeks and 6 days old. 57–63 days from last menstruation. Embryonic age: Week nr 7. 6 weeks old. 43–49 days from fertilization. The fetal period begins at the end of the 10th week of gestation (8th week of development). Since the precursors of all the major organs are created by this time, the fetal period is described both by organ and by a list of changes by weeks of gestational age. Because the precursors of the organs are formed, fetus also is not as sensitive to damage from environmental exposures as the embryo. Instead, toxic exposures often cause physiological abnormalities or minor congenital malformation. Each organ has its own development. From the 8th week until birth (around 38 weeks), the developing organism is called a fetus. The fetus is not as sensitive to damage from environmental exposures as the embryo, and toxic exposures often cause physiological abnormalities or minor congenital malformation. All major structures are already formed in the fetus, but they continue to grow and develop. Gestational age: 9 weeks and 0 days until 11 weeks and 6 days old. Embryonic age: Weeks nr 8–10. 7–9 weeks old. Gestational age: 12 weeks and 0 days until 15 weeks and 6 days old. Embryonic age: Weeks nr 11–14. 10–13 weeks old. Gestational age: 18 weeks old. Embryonic age: Week nr 17. 16 weeks old. Gestational age: 22 weeks old. Embryonic age: Week nr 21. 20 weeks old. Gestational age: 26 weeks old. Embryonic age: Week nr 25. 24 weeks old. Gestational age: 30 weeks old. Embryonic age: Week nr 29. 28 weeks old. Gestational age: 34 weeks old. Embryonic age: Week nr 33. 32 weeks old. Gestational age: 35 and 0 days until 39 weeks and 6 days old. Embryonic age: Weeks nr 34–38. 33–37 weeks old. The development is continued postnatally with adaptation to extrauterine life and child development stages. The growth rate of an embryo and infant can be reflected as the weight per gestational age, and is often given as the weight put in relation to what would be expected by the gestational age. A baby born within the normal range of weight for that gestational age is known as appropriate for gestational age (AGA). An abnormally slow growth rate results in the infant being small for gestational age, and, on the other hand, an abnormally large growth rate results in the infant being large for gestational age. A slow growth rate and preterm birth are the two factors that can cause a low birth weight. Low birth weight (below 2000 grams) can ultimately increase the likelihood of schizophrenia by almost four times. The growth rate can be roughly correlated with the fundal height which can be estimated by abdominal palpation. More exact measurements can be performed with obstetric ultrasonography. ;Poverty Poverty has been linked to poor prenatal care and has been an influence on prenatal development. Women in poverty are more likely to have children at a younger age, which results in low birth weight. Many of these expecting mothers have little education and are therefore less aware of the risks of smoking, alcohol, and drugs - other factors that influence the growth rate of a fetus. Women in poverty are more likely to have diseases that are harmful to the fetus. ;Mother's age Women between the ages of 16 and 35 have a healthier environment for a fetus than women under 16 or over 35. Women between this age gap are more likely to have fewer complications. Women over 35 are more inclined to have a longer labor period, which could potentially result in death of the mother or fetus. Women under 16 and over 35 have a higher risk of preterm labor (premature baby), and this risk increases for women in poverty, African Americans, and women who smoke. Young mothers are more likely to engage in high risk behaviors, such as using alcohol, drugs, or smoking, resulting in negative consequences for the fetus. Premature babies from young mothers are more likely to have neurological defects that will influence their coping capabilities - irritability, trouble sleeping, crying, etc. There is a risk of mental retardation for infants over the age of 40 - down syndrome. Teen mothers and mother over 35 are more exposed to the risks of miscarriages, premature births, and birth defects. ;Drug use Eleven percent of fetus's are exposed to illicit drug use during pregnancy. Maternal drug use occurs when drugs ingested by the pregnant woman are metabolized in the placenta and then transmitted to the fetus. When using drugs (narcotics), there is a greater risk of birth defects, low birth weight, and a higher rate of death in infants or stillbirths. Drug use will influence extreme irritability, crying, and risk for SIDS once the fetus is born. The chemicals in drugs can cause an addiction in the babies once they are born. Marijuana will slow the fetal growth rate and can result in premature delivery. It can also lead to low birth weight, a shortened gestational period and complications in delivery. Heroin will cause interrupted fetal development, stillbirths, and can lead to numerous birth defects. Heroin can also result in premature delivery, creates a higher risk of miscarriages, result in facial abnormalities and head size, and create gastrointestinal abnormalities in the fetus. There is an increased risk for SIDS, dysfunction in the central nervous system, and neurological dysfunctions including tremors, sleep problems, and seizures. The fetus is also put at a great risk for low birth weight and respiratory problems. Cocaine use results in a smaller brain, which results in learning disabilities for the fetus. Cocaine puts the fetus at a higher risk of being stillborn or premature. Cocaine use also results in low birthweight, damage to the central nervous system, and motor dysfunction. ;Alcohol Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is a developmental disorder that is a consequence of too much alcohol intake by the mother during pregnancy. Some studies suggest that mild drinking does not harm the fetus, but at present there is no medical consensus about what constitutes a “safe” amount.Children with FAS have a variety of distinctive facial features, brain abnormalities, and cognitive deficits. Alcohol use leads to disruptions of the fetus's brain development, interferes with the fetus's cell development and organization, and affects the maturation of the central nervous system. Alcohol use can lead to heart and other major organ defects, such as small brain, which will affect the fetus's learning behaviors. Alcohol use during pregnancy can cause behavioral problems in a child, mental problems or retardation and facial abnormalities - meaning smaller eyes, thin upper lip, and little groove between the nose and lips. Use can also increase the risk of miscarriages and stillbirths, or low birth weight. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) leads to a pattern of malformations - mental retardation, growth issues, face abnormalities, learning disabilities, and heart defects. ;Smoking and Nicotine When a mother smokes during pregnancy the fetus is exposed to nicotine, tar, and carbon monoxide. Nicotine results in less blood flow to the fetus because it constricts the blood vessels. Carbon monoxide reduces the oxygen flow to the fetus. The reduction of blood and oxygen flow results in stillbirth, low birth weight, and ectopic pregnancy. There is an increase of risk of sudden death syndrome (SIDS) in infants. Nicotine also increases the risk for miscarriages and premature births or infant mortality. There has been a link from smoking during pregnancy that led to asthma in childhood. Low birth weight and premature births can also increase the risk of asthma if a mother smoked during pregnancy because of the effects on the respiratory system of the fetus. ;Diseases If a mother is infected with a disease, the placenta cannot filter out the virus carriers and infect the fetus. Babies can be born with venereal diseases transmitted by the mother. ;Mother's diet and physical health An adequate nutrition is needed for a healthy fetus. This is because of the greater importance of certain systems in the human body over others as stated in the disposable soma theory. When there is inadequate nutrition during the developmental stages of the fetus, less energy is put into forming somatic structures while more energy is invested in the reproductive structures of the fetus. This is a characteristic of evolutionary biology and fetal development since without a capable reproductive system, once the child reaches maturation it would be unable to produce offspring. However, it is possible for the child to survive to reproductive age with a slightly lower birth weight than normal. This trade-off for a completely developed reproductive structure for a lower birth weight is the reason why the lack of nutrition causes a lower birth weight in newborns. A lack of iron results in anemia in the fetus, the lack of calcium can result in poor bone and teeth formation, and the lack of protein can lead to a smaller fetus and mental retardation. ; Mother's prenatal depression A study found that mother's prenatal depression was associated with adverse perinatal outcomes such as slower fetal growth rates. It appears that prenatal maternal cortisol levels play a role in mediating these outcomes. ;Environmental toxins Toxins lead to higher rates of miscarriage, sterility, and birth defects. Toxins include fetal exposure to lead, mercury, and ethanol or hazardous environments. ;Low birth weight Low birth weight increases an infants risk of long-term growth and cognitive and language deficits. It also results in a shortened gestational period and can lead to prenatal complications. Crews, D. E. (2003). Human senescence: evolutionary and biocultural perspectives (Vol. 36). Cambridge University Press. 
