 Preoperational anxiety is a universal reaction experienced by patients who are admitted to the hospital for surgery. Just the initial idea of having surgical procedures can bring about very high levels of anxiety in patients. Preoperational anxiety can be described as an unpleasant state of tension or uneasiness that results from a patient's doubts or fears (from a vast array) before an operation. The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) is a widespread method of measuring pre-operative anxiety for research. The STAI consists of two 20-item self-report scales that attempt to accurately measure the worry and apprehension based on both present circumstances and personality traits. Patients are asked to rate the frequency of particular symptoms. The STAI was based on the theory that there are two different aspects of anxiety. This caused two different sections of the STAI to develop: the State scale (designed to measure the circumstantial or temporary arousal of anxiety), and the Trait scale (designed to measure the long-standing personality characteristics related to anxiety). The items on each scale are based on a two-factor model: anxiety present, anxiety absent. In the 2009 Journal of Nursing Measurement, Tluczek, Henriques, and Brown mention that one of the problems with the STAI is that the fast-paced hospital environment makes it is difficult to get each patient through all 20 items, especially when there are other assessments that need to be done. Recently, other people have tried to create shortened versions of the 20-item STAI. For example, Tluczek et al. (2009) have found that the Marteau and Bekker’s six-item version of the State Anxiety scale has “favorable internal consistency reliability and validity when correlated with the parent 20-item State scale”. Research on new and improved methods is sure to be continuing. Other alternatives for quick and accurate measurements may be found in the future. Through the research done by several individuals, it is concluded that many different there are many different fears that can cause preoperational anxiety. These fears include: There are many different factors that play into the level of anxiety a patient might experience: This is an average obtained through research done by Dirik and Karancei. They were obtained using the 20 items of the STAI-State scale administered before and after surgery. Irving Janis separates the factor trends that are commonly seen affecting anxiety into three different levels: When anxiety alters the patient’s vital signs, it results in physiological responses such as tachycardia, hypertension, elevated temperature, sweating, nausea and a heightened sense of touch, smell or hearing. A patient may also experience peripheral vasoconstriction, which makes it difficult for the hospital staff to obtain blood from the individual. Anxiety may cause behavioral and cognitive changes which can result in increased tension, apprehension, nervousness and aggression. Some patients may become so nervous and apprehensive that they cannot understand or follow simple instructions. Some may be so aggressive and demanding that they require constant attention of the nursing staff. In research conducted by Irving Janis, common reactions and strategies were separated into three different levels of preoperational anxiety: 1. Low Anxiety Patients in this category tend to adopt a joking attitude or to say things like “there’s nothing to it!” Because most pain is not preconceived by the patient, the patients tends to be blame their pain on the hospital staff. In this case, the patient feels as if they have been mistreated. This is because the patient doesn't have the usual mindset that pain is an unavoidable result of an operation. Other trends include displaying a calm and relaxed attitude during preoperative care. They don't usually experience any sleeping disturbances. They also tend to make little effort to seek more information about medical procedures. This may be due to the fact that they are unaware of the potential threats, or it may just be because they have succeeded in shutting themselves out and eliminating all thought of doubt and fear. The main concern that low anxiety patients tend to express is finances, and they usually deny apprehension about operational dangers. 2. Moderate Anxiety Patients in this category may only experience minor emotional tension. The occasional worry or fear that is experienced by a patient with moderate anxiety can usually be suppressed. Some may suffer from insomnia, but they also usually respond well to mild sedatives. Their outward manner may seem relatively calm and well controlled, except for small moments where it is apparent to others that the patient is suffering from an inner conflict. They can usually perform daily tasks, only becoming restless from time to time. These patients are usually very motivated to develop reliable information from medical authority in order to reach a point of comfortable relief. 3. High Anxiety Patients in this category will usually try to reassure themselves by seeking information, but these attempts, in the long-run, are unsuccessful at helping the patient reach a comfortable point because the fear is so dominant. It is common for patients in this level of anxiety to engage in mentally distracting activities in an attempt to get their mind off of anticipated danger. They have a hard time idealizing their situation or maintaining any sort of conception that things could turn out well in the end. This because they tend to dwell on improbable dangers. On the positive side, if a patient experiences moderate amounts of anxiety, the anxiety can aid in the preparation for surgery. On the negative side, the anxiety can cause harm if the patient experiences an excessive or diminutive amount. One reason for this is that small amounts of anxiety will not adequately prepare the patient for pain. Also, higher levels of anxiety can over-sensitize the patient to unpleasant stimuli, which would heighten their senses of touch, smell or hearing. This results in intense pain, dizziness, and nausea. It can also increase the patient’s feelings of uneasiness in the unfamiliar surroundings. Anxiety has also been proven to cause higher analgesic and anaesthetic requirement, postoperative pain, and prolonged hospital stay. Irving L. Janis describes the effect of preoperative aniety on postoperative reactions to by separating it into the three levels: 1. Low Anxiety:. The defenses of denial and other reassurances that were created to ward off the worry and apprehension preoperatively are not effective long-term. When all the pain and stress is experienced post-operatively, the emotional tension is unrelieved because there aren’t any real reassurances available from the pre-operational stage. 2. Moderate Anxiety: Reality-oriented reassurances that were used to prepare a patient with moderate anxiety for an operation are stored in the patient’s memory, so they are available to aid in post-operational stress. 3. High Anxiety: Because the reassurances given by hospital personnel were not effective pre-operatively, there aren’t any real reassurances available to aid with the stress stimuli that are subsequently encountered. 
