 Psychotic depression refers to a major depressive episode which is accompanied by psychotic symptoms. It can occur in the context of bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder. It can be difficult to distinguish from schizoaffective disorder; that disorder requires the presence of psychotic symptoms for at least two weeks without any mood symptoms present. Diagnosis using the DSM-IV involves meeting the criteria for a major depressive episode, along with the criteria for the "psychotic features" specifier. Individuals with psychotic depression experience the symptoms of a major depressive episode, along with one or more psychotic symptoms, including delusions and/or hallucinations. Delusions can be classified as mood congruent or incongruent, depending on whether or not the nature of the delusions is in keeping with the individual's mood state. Common themes of mood congruent delusions include guilt, punishment, personal inadequacy, or disease. Half of patients experience more than one kind of delusion. Delusions occur without hallucinations in about one-half to two-thirds of patients with psychotic depression. Hallucinations can be auditory, visual, olfactory (smell), or haptic (touch). Patients with psychotic depression may have a greater suicide risk than patients with non-psychotic depression. They may also have greater cognitive deficits (e.g., memory problems) than those with non-psychotic depression. Psychotic symptoms tend to develop after an individual has already had several episodes of depression without psychosis. However, once psychotic symptoms have emerged, they tend to reappear with each future depressive episode. The prognosis for psychotic depression is not considered to be as poor as for schizoaffective disorders or primary psychotic disorders. Still, those who have experienced a depressive episode with psychotic features have an increased risk of relapse and suicide compared to those without psychotic features, and they tend to have more pronounced sleep abnormalities. The families of those who have experienced psychotic depression are at increased risk for both psychotic depression and schizophrenia. Most patients with psychotic depression report having an initial episode between the ages of 20 and 40. Over a lifetime, it appears that patients with psychotic depression experience an average of 4 to 9 episodes. As with other depressive episodes, psychotic depression tends to be episodic, with symptoms lasting for a certain amount of time and then subsiding. While psychotic depression can be chronic (lasting more than 2 years), most depressive episodes episodes last less than 24 months. Unlike psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder, patients with psychotic depression generally function well between episodes, both socially and professionally. Psychotic symptoms are often missed in psychotic depression, either because patients do not think their symptoms are abnormal or they attempt to conceal their symptoms from others. On the other hand, psychotic depression may be confused with schizoaffective disorder. There are a number of biological features that may distinguish psychotic depression from non-psychotic depression. The most significant difference may be the presence of an abnormality in the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis (HPA) axis. The HPA axis appears to be dysregulated in psychotic depression, with dexamethasone suppression tests demonstrating higher levels of cortisol following dexamethasone administration (i.e. lower cortisol suppression). Those with psychotic depression also have higher ventricular-to-brain ratios than those with non-psychotic depression. Before electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was invented in the 1930s, it was frequently observed that patients experiencing delusions with depression had poorer response to medication treatment. ECT seemed to have similar effects for depressed patients both with and without psychotic symptoms. The interest in psychotic depression increased after tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) became available, because while non-psychotic depression responded to TCAs, psychotic depression did not. In the past 40 years there has been a renewed interest in psychotic depression. The FDA is considering a special class of drugs for the treatment of PMD as researchers learn more about the biology of the disease. Many studies have suggested that psychotic depression differs from non-psychotic depression in treatment response. Psychotic depression is less likely than non-psychotic depression to respond to placebo and to the use of only an antidepressant or an antipsychotic. The combination of an antidepressant and an antipsychotic appears to be necessary for the treatment of psychotic depression. Early studies suggest an 80-90% response rate in psychotic depression with combination treatment. Patients with psychotic depression should be treated with a combination of antipsychotic and antidepressant medications, or electroconvulsive therapy. ECT is considered a first-line treatment in severe depression with psychotic features. The antidepressant bupropion has been associated with a small risk of triggering psychotic symptoms, so it should be used with caution in those with psychotic depression. The current treatments of psychotic depression are reasonably effective but tend to carry a high side effect burden and may take a long time to work. Combination treatment with atypical antipsychotics and SSRIs tend to be associated with significant weight gain and sexual dysfunction. TCAs are lethal in overdose and some are associated with extra-pyramidal side effects including tardive dyskinesia. Finally, ECT has side effects of temporary cognitive deficits (e.g., confusion, memory problems), in addition to the burden of repeated exposures to general anesthesia. Among the newer experimental treatments is the study of glucocorticoid antagonists, including mifepristone. These strategies may treat the underlying pathophysiology of psychotic depression by correcting an overactive HPA axis. By competitively blocking certain neuro-receptors, these medications render cortisol less able to directly act on the brain. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is being investigated as an alternative to ECT in the treatment of depression. TMS involves the administration of a focused electromagnetic field to the cortex to stimulate specific nerve pathways. A number of early studies have shown promise of TMS in major depressive disorder with few side effects. TMS does not require anesthesia and has not been associated with significant cognitive deficits. 
