 The Quantified Self is a movement to incorporate technology into data acquisition on aspects of a person's daily life in terms of inputs (e.g. food consumed, quality of surrounding air), states (e.g. mood, arousal, blood oxygen levels), and performance (mental and physical). Such self-monitoring and self-sensing, which combines wearable sensors (EEG, ECG, video, etc.) and wearable computing, is also known as lifelogging or sousveillance. Other names for using self-tracking data to improve daily functioning are “self-tracking”, "auto-analytics", “body hacking” and “self-quantifying”. The history of self-tracking using wearable sensors combined with wearable computing and wireless communication, dates back many years, and appeared, in the form of sousveillance (wearable physiological sensors, etc.) in the 1970s. The term "quantified self" appears to have been proposed by Wired Magazine editors Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly in 2007 as "a collaboration of users and tool makers who share an interest in self knowledge through self-tracking." In 2010, Wolf spoke about the movement at TED, and in May 2011 the first international conference was held in Mountain View, California. Today the global community has over a hundred groups in 31 countries around the world. The primary methodology of self-quantification is data collection, followed by visualization, cross-referencing and the discovery of correlations. Life-tracking information from various applications can be difficult to integrate and find meaning. Websites such as Quantimodo can help by synergizing, visualizing, and analyzing the cacophony data to identify correlations between specific input factors and treatments (independent variables) and mood outcomes (dependent variables). The Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient derived from an XY scatterplot of input behaviours and output states can quantify the effectiveness of various treatments. The human mind is not powerful enough to keep track of the countless factors that go into producing an emotional state. Timeline graphical analysis can help to identify potential confounding uncontrolled variables that may be contaminating the results of an experiment. Fine-grained, personalized minimum effective dosages of drugs can be established. Degrees of drug tolerance and withdrawal symptoms can be quantified. By integrating the area under the mood curves, true cost-benefit analyses weighing therapeutic benefits against adverse effects can be performed. Notable self-quantification tools are listed below. Numerous other hardware devices and software are available, thanks to recent advances and cost reductions in sensor technology, mobile connectivity, and battery life. 
