 Richard P. Usatine, MD is a Professor of Family and Community Medicine, Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery. He is Assistant Director of Medical Humanities Education at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio. Dr. Usatine received his MD from Columbia University and went on to complete his residency in family medicine at UCLA Medical Center. Since 1984, Dr. Usatine has been working with medical students to provide health care to homeless families as well as the medically underserved. Dr. Usatine served as the medical director of four free clinics for homeless people in Los Angeles, California. In 2000, Dr. Usatine was recognized as the national recipient of the Humanism in Medicine Award, by the Association of American Medical Colleges. Dr. Usatine co-founded the medical student-run clinic at Alpha Home in San Antonio, Texas that opened in January, 2005. Dr. Usatine created a Humanism in Medicine Fellowship for medical students that work during their senior year at the Alpha Home Clinic and the SAMM transitional living and learning center for homeless families. In 2008, Dr. Usatine won the Volunteer of the Year Award from the United Way of San Antonio and Bexar County in the category of Individual in Service to an Agency. Dr. Usatine is the founder and medical director of the University Health System Skin Clinic in San Antonio. He is a board-certified family physician with special training and interest in dermatology. He is the national chair of the yearly Skin Course put on by the American Academy of Family Physicians. Dr. Usatine is the founder of the Interactive Dermatology Atlas on the web and the editor of Photo Rounds in the Journal of Family Practice. Since 2000, he has been chosen yearly by his peers to be included in The Best Doctors in America. Dr. Richard Usatine has been involved in Global Health through his work in Mexico, Guatemala, Panama, Haiti and Ethiopia. Dr. Usatine is the co-author of over 130 articles and six books: Dr. Usatine is the co-founder and co-president of Usatine Media, LLC, which has been developing medical apps for iOS (Apple iPhone, iPad and iPod touch) as well as Android since 2010. Currently Usatine Media has many apps from such diverse areas in medicine as anatomy, family medicine, dermatology, ultrasound, emergency medicine, infectious disease and aesthetics. 
