 Rosetrees Trust (Charitable) was created in 1987 by a family business, using venture philanthropy to find and fund leading medical researchers across a wide range of illnesses. Rosetrees provides grant funding to medical researchers to support research likely to lead to early life changing and improvements in human health. Rosetrees was established in 1987 and over 20 years, using an endowment provided by the founding family, has gifted millions of pounds to medical research. Rosetrees has supported a network of professors, researchers and universities. In that time it has used some of its income (£2 million) to help secure over £60 million of grants from major funders such as the Wellcome Trust, the Medical Research Council (UK) and Cancer Research UK. The Rosetrees Trust's vision is to fund medical / medical science researchers whether established or young and promising with the potential to become future leaders in their field. It recognises early potential and supports new diagnostic testing and the testing of existing drugs for other benefits. In fact, at this moment, Rosetrees Trust supports over 100 projects, including researchers at the Institute of Cancer Research, Arthritis Research Campaign, Royal College of Surgeons, University College London, University of Oxford, University of Cambridge, Kings College London, Imperial College London, Institute of Psychiatry, UCL Institute of Neurology, Royal Free Hospital, and Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Rosetrees Trust focuses on: Rosetrees contribution to over 150 research projects covers 12 main areas of health: Projects are as diverse and varied as funding the use of fish oils to fend off arthritis, to inserting heart cells grown from stem cells to repair heart muscle. Rosetrees looks for projects that are likely to lead to early practical benefit and help the largest number of people. Many researchers and surgeons see practical potential benefits for example Rosetrees supports the Royal College of Surgeons fellowships where researchers test their ideas. This has led to the Rosetrees Prize for the best projects (see below for more details. Some of the 150 research projects include: 
