 Rupture of the capsule of the spleen, an organ in the upper left part of the abdomen, is a situation that requires immediate medical attention. The rupture of a normal spleen can be caused by trauma, such as a motor vehicle accident. The spleen is an organ in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen that filters blood by removing old or damaged blood cells and platelets. While not essential to sustain life, the spleen performs protective immunological functions in the body and contrary to popular belief, is not useless. It also helps the immune system by destroying bacteria and other foreign substances by opsonization and phagocytosis, and by producing antibodies. It also stores approximately 33 percent of all platelets in the body. The most common cause of a ruptured spleen is blunt abdominal trauma, such as in traffic or sports accidents. Direct, penetrating injuries, for example, stab or gunshot wounds are rare. Rarely, the spleen might rupture spontaneously. In minor injuries with little bleeding, there may be abdominal pain, tenderness in the epigastrium and pain in the left flank. Often the pain is radiating to the left shoulder. In larger injuries with more extensive bleeding, signs of hypovolemic shock are most prominent. This might include a rapid pulse, low blood pressure, rapid breathing, paleness and anxiety. Splenic rupture is usually diagnosed by ultrasound of the abdomen. Ultrasound can detect free fluid due to bleeding and might directly show damage to the spleen itself. Radiographs of the thorax and abdomen might be performed to exclude other injuries. In stable patients, computed tomography of the abdomen can give a fuller overview of the splenic and other injuries. In the past, a diagnostic peritoneal lavage was often used to detect intra-abdominal blood, but this has largely been superseded by modern imaging. Because a splenic rupture permits large amounts of blood to leak into the abdominal cavity, it can result in shock and death. In the past, this would routinely be treated with emergency surgery and possible removal of the spleen, but it is becoming more common to simply monitor the patient to make sure the bleeding stops by itself, and to allow the spleen to heal on its own. If an individual's spleen is enlarged, as is frequent in mononucleosis, most physicians will not allow activities (such as contact sports) where injury to the abdomen could be catastrophic. Patients whose spleens have been removed must receive immunizations to help prevent infections such as pneumonia. This helps to replace the lost function of this organ. 
