 The Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences is one of the eight schools that comprise Tufts University. It is located on the university's health sciences campus in the Chinatown district of Boston, Massachusetts. The Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences provides an array of training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Additional programs focus on summer research training for undergraduates and medical students and on research internships for post-baccalaureates. The Basic Science Division of the Sackler School offers PhD degrees in eight disciplines: Biochemistry; Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology; Cellular and Molecular Physiology; Genetics; Immunology; Molecular Microbiology, Neuroscience; and Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. The Clinical Research Division offers MS and PhD programs in Clinical Research. The Basic Science Division partners with Tufts University School of Medicine to host an MD/PhD program, and also with the Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine to host a DVM/PhD program. In both of these programs, trainees complete professional school training in the medical or veterinary school and conduct PhD research with members of the Sackler faculty. The dean of the Sackler School reports to the dean of the School of Medicine. In fall 2004, the school enrolled approximately 240 full-time students and employed 99 full-time and part-time faculty members. The Tufts University School of Medicine (TUSM) and the Sackler School are located in five adjoining research buildings along Boston's Harrison Avenue and a teaching and administrative building, the Arthur M. Sackler Center for Health Communications. The newest addition is the $65 million, nine-story, Jaharis Family Center for Biomedical and Nutrition Sciences. The Jaharis Family Center provides research laboratories and offices for many Sackler faculty members and their students, postdoctoral fellows and technical staff. The building also includes offices and laboratory facilities for the Gerald J. and Dorothy R. Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy and the Department of Family and Community Medicine in TUSM. TUSM and the Sackler School are adjacent to the Tufts Medical Center, the School of Dental Medicine, and Gerald J. and Dorothy R. Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy, and across the street from the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging. The Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences was established in 1980 as part of then-Tufts University President Jean Mayer's vision of a "one medicine" approach to the health sciences. The school grew out of gifts from Dr. Arthur M. Sackler, Dr. Mortimer D. Sackler, and Dr. Raymond R. Sackler. Mayer intended the new school to coordinate basic science research and training initiatives in the Schools of Medicine, Dental Medicine, Veterinary Medicine, and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. 
