 Samuel Alexander Armas (born ) is the child shown in a famous photograph by Michael Clancy, dubbed the "Hand of Hope", of his hand extending from an opening in his mother's uterus and touching his surgeon's finger during open fetal surgery for spina bifida. The photograph was taken during a medical procedure to fix the spina bifida lesion of a 21-week-old fetus in the womb. The operation was performed by a surgical team at Vanderbilt University in Nashville. The team, Dr. Joseph Bruner and Dr. Noel Tulipan, had been developing a technique for correcting certain fetal problems in mid-pregnancy. Their procedure involved temporarily opening the uterus, draining the amniotic fluid, partially extracting and performing surgery on the tiny fetus, and then restoring the fetus to the uterus back inside the mother. Alex and Julie Armas first discovered that their baby had spina bifida during an ultrasound 14 weeks after conception. The Armases came across the Vanderbilt procedure while researching their options online. This was the surgical team's 54th operation on a fetus still in the uterus. During the operation, Dr. Joseph Bruner opened the womb and Dr. Tulipan successfully alleviated the effects of the opening in Samuel's spine caused by the spina bifida. Pictures from the surgery were printed in a number of newspapers in the U.S. and around the world, including USA Today. As a result of the operation, Armas was healthy when he was delivered on December 2, 1999. On September 25, 2003, the boy's parents, Alex and Julie, testified before the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about the photo and their experience with in-utero surgery. In 1999 Matt Drudge hosted a Saturday night television show called Drudge on the Fox News Channel. In Nov 1999 he attempted to show Samuel's picture on his Fox News program, but was not allowed to by the network. This led to his leaving of the show for what he claimed to be the network's censorship. Fox News directors didn't want to use the picture because they feared Drudge would use it to support a pro-life argument. They viewed this would be misleading because the tabloid photo dealt not with abortion, but with an emergency operation on the baby for spina bifida. The picture attracted a lot of attention when it was released, as it was used by opponents of abortion who asserted that the baby reached through the womb and grabbed the doctor's hand, thus showing signs of life at the 21st week of pregnancy. Indeed the photograph and many of the texts which often accompany it seem to support this view, including the account of the photographer Michael Clancy: However, the surgeon later stated that Samuel and his mother Julie were under anesthesia and could not move. "The baby did not reach out," Dr Bruner said. "The baby was anesthetized. The baby was not aware of what was going on." Clancy had become a Christian within the previous three months. The surgeon who operated on the mother stated that rather than the fetus' hand clutching on to his finger, he was simply pushing the fetus' arm that had suddenly jolted out of the womb back into the womb in order to finish the surgery. The event has been referred to in two medical TV series: the drama House, in the episode Fetal Position, and the sitcom Scrubs, in the episode My Road to Nowhere. An image of the hand of a newborn grasping the finger of the doctor became a viral hit in January 2013. 
