 The School of Dental Medicine University of Zagreb (:, acronym: SFZG) is a leading institution for graduate and postgraduate education in the field of dental medicine in Croatia. While the School of Dental Medicine was established as a separate institution in 1962, the origins of the school date back to 1922. The history of the School of Dental Medicine University of Zagreb consisted of three phases of development: On January 20, 1922, Assistant Professor Eduard Radošević was entrusted with the newly created Chair of Odontology in the School of Medicine of the University of Zagreb. In those days there was little space for lectures, especially for clinical dental courses, a situation that remained until 1935, when the Chair created its dental practice. The practice evolved the following year to the dental department, and two years from formation into the dental clinic with founding director, Prof. Radošević, and two assistants, but it still remained a part of the parent Clinic of Otorhinolaringology. In 1939, the dental clinic split off with a new head, Professor Ivo Čupar. In the same period, the Chair received its second faculty, under Assistant Professor Juraj Kallay, which strongly enhanced both theoretical and practical courses. In 1948, after the Second World War, a separate Odontological Department in the School of Medicine began operating, in which the special education program lasted five years. In doing so, the students from Odontological Department attended classes together with the students of general medicine. From the third year of study, dental students attended classes separately. The first teachers were Dr. Živko Bolf and Dr. Miroslav Suvin. The Ministry of Public Health of the People's Republic of Croatia in 1951, upon the proposal of the Council for Higher Medical Education, issued the Executive order of organization of Odontological Department and its relationship with the Faculty of Medicine in Zagreb. Classes are divided into general medical and vocational subjects, with its elected teachers and Prof. Ivo Čupar, Dr. Zdenko Njemirovskij, Dr. Vitold Ritterman and Dr. Dalibor Svoboda. In 1954, first eight students completed the dental degree. In 1957 the Odontological Section was renamed as the Dentistry Department, and graduate students have received the academic title of Doctor Medicinae Stomatologicae. Organizational changes were effected in 1958 and 1959 and in the refurbished building in Gundulićeva 5 were based five institutes: Dentistry study in the academic year 1960/61 finally received its first Associate Dean: Professor Miroslav Suvin. Following the promotion of biomedical area, dentistry has evolved into a special field in Europe and America and many independent dental colleges formed. Following these events, the Croatian Parliament made the decision in 1962, to create the independent School of Dental Medicine, University of Zagreb. In the same decision, Professor Živko Bolf was appointed as founding dean. This created the essential prerequisites for further educational, scientific and technical progress, over the decades to the present. For purposes of clinical courses, the University of Zagreb took the decision in 1971 to nominate General Hospital "Dr. Mladen Stojanović" as a clinical teaching base for the training of dental students. This provided for excellent cooperation in the teaching of clinical medical subjects. 
