 The Scottish Ambulance Service () is part of NHS Scotland, and serves all of Scotland. It is a Special Health Board funded directly by the Health and Social Care Directorates of the Scottish Government. The two main functions of the trust are the provision of a Paramedic-led accident and emergency service to respond to 999 calls and the Patient Transport Service (non-Emergency Service), which performs the role of taking patients to and from their hospital appointments, discharges from Hospital and non-urgent transfers. In 1948 the newly formed National Health Service contracted two voluntary organisations, the St Andrew's Ambulance Association and the British Red Cross, to jointly provide a national ambulance service for Scotland. The service was known as the St Andrew's and Red Cross Scottish Ambulance Service. The Red Cross withdrew from the service in 1967; the service was renamed the St Andrew's Scottish Ambulance Service. In 1974 the service was taken over by the NHS, the title being shortened to the Scottish Ambulance Service. The St. Andrew's First Aid society continues as a voluntary organisation. The national headquarters are in west side of Edinburgh and there are five divisions within the Service, namely: The Patient Transport Service carries almost 1.6 million patients every year. This service is provided so that patients who are physically or medically unfit to travel to hospital out-patient appointments by any other means can still make their appointments. The service also handles non-emergency admissions and discharges from hospitals. Patient Transport Vehicles are Staffed by Ambulance Care Assistants either double or single crewed depending on the patients needs. They are trained to look after patients during the journey to and from Hospital. The Scottish Ambulance Service is fully funded by the Scottish Government and is free of charge. In addition Emergency ambulance services are also free for all overseas visitors to Scotland. The service has the only government-funded air ambulance service in the UK, operated under contract by Gama Aviation. The fleet consists of two Eurocopter EC-135 helicopters (operated under sub-contract by Bond Air Services) and two Beechcraft B200C King Air fixed-wing aircraft, which provide emergency response and transfers of patients to and from remote areas of Scotland. In 2010/11, the air ambulance service flew 3,774 missions. One helicopter is based at Glasgow City Heliport, while the other operating base is Inverness Airport; one King Air is based at Aberdeen Airport, the other at Glasgow Airport. The aircraft based in Glasgow are regularly used by the UK's only Emergency Medical Retrieval Service. The air ambulance service was occasionally featured as part of the popular Channel 5 television documentary series Highland Emergency. In June 2012 the result of a tender process for a new seven-year air ambulance contract was announced. Commencing in April 2013, the winning tenderer Gama Aviation will continue to provide two rotary- and two fixed-wing aircraft on a 24-hour basis throughout Scotland. The two present Eurocopter EC-135 helicopters will be replaced by two larger and faster Eurocopter EC-145 T2s. These will continue to be operated under sub-contract by Bond Air Services. Operational bases will remain as at present. In late 2012 a charity was founded to provide a further air ambulance to work alongside the state-funded aircraft. Scotland's Charity Air Ambulance is scheduled to commence operations in early 2013 and will operate an MBB Bo 105 helicopter crewed by Scottish Ambulance Service paramedics. The aircraft is expected to be based at Perth Airport and tasking will be from the SAS ambulance control centre at Cardonald. Special Operations Response Teams (SORT) have been set up in the North, East and West of Scotland to respond to major incidents including Nuclear, Chemical and Radiological ones. These teams have specially equipped vehicles with decontamination equipment on board. The Scottish Ambulance Service operates three Ambulance Control Centres (ACC) {Previously known as EMDC until June 2012} which provide Command & Control and 999 Call Taking Facilities for the Service, these are located in Cardonald, South Queensferry and Inverness. These centres operate 24 hours per day 365 days per year. All requests for an Ambulance are prioritised using a piece of software called the Advanced Medical Priority Dispatch System (AMPDS) and a Response is sent according to clinical need. Responses can be in the form of an Ambulance, a Paramedic Response Unit, a BASICS Doctor, an Ambulance Officer or a Community First Responder. The Service has its own dedicated training academy within the campus of Glasgow Caledonian University. The facility has purpose built classrooms, lecture theatres, syndicate rooms and a clinical simulation area that recreates a 16-bed hospital ward and Accident & Emergency department allowing realistic interaction with other trainee healthcare professionals. Prior to April 2011, the service used its own dedicated training college located at Barony Castle in Eddleston near Peebles. Set in of formal gardens and woodlands, Barony was a residential training and conference centre with 78 bedrooms that allowed the service to carry out all its training in house. In 2011/12, the service: The ambulances have been painted white since the formation of the Scottish Ambulance Service. The original colour of white was a cream white called "Ambulance White" this has now been replaced by a brighter "Titanium" White. The ambulances originally carried a blue stripe of the sides with "Scottish Ambulance Service" in yellow lettering. The livery was changed to yellow fluorescent stripes sometime between 1986 and 1992. The current livery with Battenburg markings was introduced in 2002. 
