 The SENS Research Foundation (Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence Research Foundation) is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization co-founded by Michael Kope, Aubrey de Grey, Jeff Hall, Sarah Marr and Kevin Perrott, which is based in Mountain View, California, United States. Its activities include SENS-based research programs and public relations work for the acceptance of and interest in scientific rejuvenation research. Before the Foundation was launched in March 2009, the SENS research program was mainly pursued by the Methuselah Foundation, co-founded by Aubrey de Grey and David Gobel. The foundation's stated goal is to "transform the way the world researches and treats age-related disease". It advocates the 'SENS' approach, which it describes as "the repair of living cells and extracellular material in situ", an approach it defines in equal contrast to both geriatric medicine's focus on specific diseases and infirmities, and biogerontology's focus on intervention in metabolic processes. It funds research and uses outreach and education in order to expedite the various regenerative medicine research programs that go together to make the SENS project. In addition to research undertaken in-house at the Research Center in Mountain View, SRF has also taken part in and\or selectively funded extramural research at various other institutions, including but not limited to Yale University, Harvard University, Cambridge University, University of Texas, Rice University and University of Arizona. SENS Research Foundation subdivide their efforts into seven research strands which correspond to seven categories of cellular damage which accumulate with age: accumulated side effects of metabolism which are eventually fatal. SENS Research Foundation has at least one project underway in each of its seven research themes. SRF reaches out to policy makers, potential donors, researchers and volunteers through conferences and public events, most notably the biennial SENS Conferences held at Queens' College, Cambridge, of which there have been five so far. They also host summer internships and produce online coursework for prospective students. The founders of the SENS Research Foundation Board of Directors: Other key staff members: On September 16, 2006, Peter Thiel, co-founder and former CEO of the online payments system PayPal, announced that he is pledging $3.5 million to the Methuselah Foundation "to support scientific research into the alleviation and eventual reversal of the debilities caused by aging" (SENS research). Justin Bonomo, professional poker player, has pledged 5% of his tournament winnings for SENS research. Sam Harris, a prominent nonfiction writer and scientific skeptic, is a Methuselah Mouse Prize 300 member. 
