 Silver nanoparticles are nanoparticles of silver, i.e. silver particles of between 1 nm and 100 nm in size. While frequently described as being 'silver' some are composed of a large percentage of silver oxide due to their large ratio of surface-to-bulk silver atoms. There are many different synthetic routes to silver nanoparticles. They can be divided into three broad categories: physical vapor deposition, ion implantation, or wet chemistry. Although it may seem counter-intuitive, ion implantation has been used to create silver nanoparticles. This process has been shown to produce silver particles embedded in glass, polyurethane, silicone, polyethylene, and polymethylmethacrylate. The particles grow in the substrate with the bombardment of ions. The existence of nanoparticles is proven with optical absorbance, though the exact nature of the particles created with this method is not known. There are several wet chemical methods for creating silver nanoparticles. Typically, they involve the reduction of a silver salt such as silver nitrate with a reducing agent like sodium borohydride in the presence of colloidal stabilizer. Sodium borohydride has been used with polyvinyl alcohol, poly(vinylpyrrolidone), bovine serum albumin (BSA), citrate and cellulose as stabilizing agents. In the case of BSA, the sulfur-, oxygen- and nitrogen-bearing groups mitigate the high surface energy of the nanoparticles during the reduction. The hydroxyl groups on the cellulose are reported to help stabilize the particles. Polydopamine coated magnetic-bacterial cellulose contains multifunctional groups, which acts as a reducing agent for in situ preparation of reusable antibacterial Ag-nanocomposites. Citrate and cellulose have been used to create silver nanoparticles independent of a reducing agent as well. An additional novel wet chemistry method used to create silver nanoparticles took advantage of ß-D-glucose as a reducing sugar and a starch as the stabilizer and also cellulose molecular chain is applied to employ the reducing and stabilizing features of cellulose to synthesize nano silver. Over the last decades silver nanoparticles have found applications in catalysis, optics, electronics and other areas due to their unique size-dependent optical, electrical and magnetic properties. Currently most of the applications of silver nanoparticles are in antibacterial/antifungal agents in biotechnology and bioengineering, textile engineering, water treatment, and silver-based consumer products. There is also an effort to incorporate silver nanoparticles into a wide range of medical devices, including but not limited to Samsung has created and marketed a material called Silver Nano, that includes silver nanoparticles on the surfaces of household appliances. Silver nanoparticles have been used as the cathode in a silver-oxide battery. Exposure to silver nanoparticles has been associated with "inflammatory, oxidative, genotoxic, and cytotoxic consequences"; the silver particulates primarily accumulate in the liver. but have also been shown to be toxic in other organs including the brain. Ionic silver has a long history of use in topical medical applications, and it has been shown that ionic silver, in the right quantities, is suitable in treating wounds. The US Food and Drug Administration has approved the use of a range of different silver-impregnated wound dressings. Silver nanoparticles are now replacing silver sulfadiazine as an effective agent in the treatment of wounds. 
