 Sinus Buster is a brand of nasal spray that is available over-the-counter in the United States. It is used to ease nasal congestion, sinus pressure, and sinus headache. It is a capsaicin-based nasal spray. The active ingredient in Sinus Buster is capsaicin. With respect to relief of nasal congestion, sinus pressure, and sinus headache, capsaicin: In early 2010, Sinus Buster was evaluated in a double-blind study. The study was designed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of Sinus Buster for the treatment of sinus and nasal congestion in patients suffering from non-allergic rhinitis. The study included 42 subjects and measured the improvement in nasal congestion, sinus pressure, and headache over 2 weeks. It also evaluated speed of action and key safety parameters. The study showed that subjects who received Sinus Buster experienced onset of relief in under one minute per a stopwatch assessment (average of 52 seconds). Sinus Buster subjects showed a statistically significant improvement over the placebo in nasal congestion, sinus pressure and headache at each of the measured time points after first use (5, 10, 15, 30, 60 minutes). The study also showed Sinus Buster to have a favorable safety profile. There was no negative effect on sense of smell or indication of rebound effect. Although this pilot trial was small, Bernstein et al. concluded that Sinus Buster works quickly to effectively treat chronic rhinitis patients with a significant non-allergic component, and is safe to use continuously over 2 weeks. Additional clinical trials are needed to confirm these findings in a larger patient population. A Randomized, Double Blind, Parallel Trial Comparing Capsaicin Nasal Spray (Sinus Buster) to Placebo in Patients with Significant Non-Allergic Rhinitis. Publication pending. Capsaicin-based nasal sprays have been tested clinically for over 10 years. Key clinical findings are summarized below, as they relate to the use of capsaicin as a treatment option for sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, and cluster headaches: Sinus Buster was the first commercial capsaicin nasal spray sold in stores, starting in 2003. It was invented by Wayne Perry, a frequent guest on The Oprah Winfrey Show during the 1990s. Since 2004, Sinus Buster has been featured in lots of media outlets including the Wall Street Journal, the Today Show, Mike & Juliet, First Magazine, The Big Idea, the Howard Stern Show and more. J. R. Gach famously performed a commercial for the product describing it as "the best shit that ever was," which was advertised as the first radio commercial to feature profanity. According to [Biz Journals], the inventor sold the company to Dynova Laboratories in 2008 and created a new nasal spray that uses capsaicin and horseradish called Sinus Plumber. In 2012, Sinus Buster has garnered a small testimonial reputation for curing cancer pain. 
