 Snoezelen (pronounced ) or controlled multisensory environment (MSE) is a therapy for people with autism or developmental disabilities. It consists of placing the person in a soothing and stimulating environment, the "Snoezelen room". These rooms are specially designed to deliver stimuli to various senses, using lighting effects, color, sounds, music, scents, etc. The combination of different materials on a wall may be explored using tactile senses, and the floor may be adjusted to stimulate the sense of balance. Originally developed in the Netherlands in the 1970s, Snoezelen rooms have been established in institutions all over the world and are especially common in Germany, where more than 1200 exist. The term "snoezelen" is a neologism formed from the Dutch "snuffelen" (to seek out, to explore) and "doezelen" (to doze, to snooze). "Snoezelen" is a registered trademark of the English company Rompa. Ideally, Snoezelen therapy is a and can be staged to provide a multi-sensory experience or single sensory focus, simply by adapting the lighting, atmosphere, sounds, and textures to the specific needs of the client at the time of use. There is no formal focus on therapeutic outcome - the focus is to assist users to gain the maximum pleasure from the activity in which they and the enabler are involved. An advantage of Snoezelen therapy is that it does not rely on verbal communication and may be beneficial for people with profound autism, as it may provide stimulation for those who would otherwise be almost impossible to reach. Snoezelen therapy is used for people with autism and other developmental disabilities, dementia, brain injury and even toddlers. However, research on the benefits of treatment is scarce, based on variable clinical study designs. A small research study carried out in Brussels compared the behavior of nine adult clients with profound autism in both classroom and Snoezelen settings. Though individual results varied, the study claimed a 50% reduction in distress and stereotypical behavior, and seventy-five percent less aggression and self-injury in the Snoezelen environment. Snoezelen therapy relates to the interdependence of both the space (the physical environment) and the "client-centered" approach of the practitioner (the human environment). This specially designed sensory physical environment together with the input of the "enabling practitioner" initiates changes in arousal by affecting the relaxation process, reducing anxiety and/or pain (both physical and emotional). It aims to maximize a person's potential to focus on his own free will and to engage on a motivational stimulus (object and/or activity, and/or person), and thereby to improve communication and functioning. The defining principles of the MSE help the practitioner to focus attention on the basic elements of this approach. The following are the principles. 
