 The Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) is a national medical society in Canada, representing over 3,000 obstetricians/gynecologists, family physicians, nurses, midwives, and allied health professionals in the field of sexual reproductive health. Since its founding in 1944, the society has promoted excellence in the practice of obstetrics and worked to advance the health of women through leadership, advocacy, collaboration, outreach, and education. SOGC's stated mission is to promote excellence in the practice of obstetrics and gynecology and to advance the health of women through leadership, advocacy, collaboration, outreach and education. SOGC's stated core beliefs and principles are: SOGC has been granted full accreditation by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada (RCPSC) as a Continued Professional Development provider for physicians and health care providers in Canada. The Society offers a portfolio of professional educational activities including the Annual Clinical Meeting, RCPSC-accredited Continuing Medical Education (CME) programs, e-learning modules, and its Managing Obstetrical Risk Efficiently (MOREOB) patient safety program. A leading authority on reproductive health care, the SOGC produces national clinical guidelines for both public and medical education on important women's health issues, and publishes the monthly Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Canada (JOGC), Canada's peer-reviewed journal of obstetrics, gynaecology, and women's health. SOGC's International Women’s Health Program (IWHP), under which SOGC volunteers work with partner OB/GYN associations, strives to achieve a better world for women via a rights-based approach. The IWHP promotes sexual and reproductive health and rights, including safe motherhood and newborn health. Through IWHP, SOGC partners with obstetrics and gynaecology associations in low-resource countries to upgrade the organizational capacity of the association and to enhance the skills of health care professionals so that they may assume a leadership role in the promotion of sexual and reproductive health. The ALARM (Advances in Labor and Risk Management) International Program, a training tool designed to reduce maternal death or injury in developing countries, has been delivered in over 20 countries around the world by SOGC member volunteers. SOGC was founded in 1944 as a response to the need to promote physician education, research and excellence in care. The members of its Founding Council, which governed from 1944 to 1945, were: It was Dr. Léon Gérin-Lajoie, SOGC's first president, who suggested the name "Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada - Société des obstétriciens et gynécologues du Canada". Gérin-Lajoie was one of several SOGC representatives at the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) First World Congress in 1954, and went on to become FIGO's vice-president in 1957, and president in 1958. Beginning in the late 1980s, SOGC gradually broadened its purpose to include international women's health, advocacy, aboriginal health, public education, patient safety, and human resources in obstetrics and gynecology. During this period, the society also began admitting members of related medical professions, such as nursing and midwifery. 
