 In osteopathic medicine and osteopathy, somatic dysfunction is defined as the impaired or altered function of related components of the somatic (bodywork) system including: the skeletal, arthrodial, and myofascial structures, and their related vascular, lymphatic, and neural elements. Somatic dysfunction may be evaluated and treated by osteopaths or osteopathic physicians using osteopathic manual technique (OMT). Somatic dysfunction is diagnosed by physical examination by an osteopathic physician, which is a physician with the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree (D.O.). The osteopathic physician looks for signs and symptoms related to the somatic dysfunction commonly represented by the mnemonic device "TART" or "STAR" (tissue texture change, asymmetry, restriction, and tenderness [or sensitivity]). The physician uses techniques such as layer-by-layer palpation and intersegmental range of motion testing to diagnose the somatic dysfunction. Diagnosis usually requires only the use of the physician's hands and fingertips, though instruments such as a goniometer can be used to detect a diminished range of motion. Tissue texture changes may include edema, fibrosis, atrophy, rigidity, or hypertonicity of musculature. There may be asymmetry in the bones, muscles, or joints. There may also be a "restrictive barrier" related to the musculoskeletal structure in question. The language of "barriers" refers to the point at which a structure cannot move farther in a given direction. For example, a natural "physiologic barrier" of the arm represents the farthest that a person can naturally move their arm before it cannot be comfortably moved farther. The "anatomic barrier," describes how far the arm can be pushed or pulled by an outside force before the arm becomes physically injured. A "pathological" or "restrictive" barrier represents the shortened range of motion to which the arm is confined because of an injury, muscle spasm, or some other somatic dysfunction. The goal of treatment is to restore the arm's full range of motion (or that of the structure in question). Of the signs and symptoms associated with somatic dysfunction, tenderness is the only purely subjective finding, while the others are objective findings. Other types of somatic dysfunctions may include occlusions or mutilations of vasculature or lymphatic vessels, which can impair cardiovascular or lymphatic circulation. This may also occur secondary to organ pathology, a factor which theoretically allows the detection of visceral dysfunction by examining surface structures. It is by this explanation that Chapman's Points are said to be used in identifying problems with deep tissue structures. A Chapman's Point is an area of bunched tissue or vasculature that is assumed to occur as a result of fluid backup or another dysfunction at a portion of the vasculature more proximal to an organ affected by pathology. The evidence for these points remains controversial, though some studies suggest modest sensitivity and specificity for their use in diagnosis. The physical manifestation of somatic dysfunction is frequently associated reciprocally with visceral illness, generally related to the vertebral level associated with the organ in question. For example, T-6 (the sixth thoracic vertebra) is associated with the stomach. Similarly, the resolution of either can aid in the resolution of the other. For example, an infection may be associated with edema (causing a tissue texture change). Lymphatic drainage aids in clearing the infection while, conversely, resolution of the infection causes clearing of associated edema. Thus the physician attempts to aid the resolution of visceral disease by eliminating its associated manifestation in the musculo-skeletal system. These two reflex effects are generally referred to as the somatovisceral and viscerosomatic reflexes, respectively and are routinely encountered in regular clinical work. Interestingly, it does not matter if the spinal lesion was caused by nociceptic (pain) impulses from the organ, or by biomechanical forces. The result is the same-a reciprocal neurological phenomenon between the viscus and the vertebra wherein the status of the vertebra has been altered, which will generally persist in the absence of treatment, and will create trouble unless treated. When this "vicious cycle" is broken by the application of osteopathic manipulation, a return to normal physiological status both in the spinal tissue and the organ tissue generally ensues except when complicated by the presence of major infection or significant physical trauma. The clinical picture will vary from patient to patient, but the phenomena are based on sound neurologial principles. The founder of osteopathic medicine, Dr. Andrew Still, held that spinal lesion effects were based on the compromise of vascular supply not on neurological effects. In recent years, most osteopathic physicians agree that neurological effects are primary, while vascular changes may play some part. Research in somatic dysfunction and the use of osteopathic manipulative medicine (OMM), also called osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) has resulted in mixed conclusions. In an article published in the New England Journal of Medicine in November 1999, researchers concluded that osteopathic manipulative medicine and traditional drug therapy resulted in equivalent resolution of lower back pain in a nearly identical time frame. The difference was that those receiving osteopathic manipulative medicine required less pharmaceutical intervention. The advantage of osteopathic manipulative medicine was diminution of adverse drug reactions while the disadvantage was the greater amount of physician time required for each patient. However, a meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials of osteopathic manipulative treatment that involved blinded assessments of low back pain in ambulatory settings found from computerized bibliographic searches of MEDLINE, EMBASE, MANTIS, OSTMED, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, found that osteopathic manipulative treatment significantly reduces low back pain. The analysis also concluded that the level of pain reduction is greater than expected from placebo effects alone and persists for at least three months. 
