 SoundBite Hearing System is a non-surgical bone conduction prosthetic device that transmits sound via the teeth. It is an alternative to earlier surgical bone conduction prosthetic devices, which require surgical implantation of a metal post into the skull to conduct sound. SoundBite uses the tooth instead of the post and eliminates the need for surgery. It is therefore typically lower in complications and in cost than the prevalent surgical treatment. SoundBite Hearing System has two principal components: a behind-the-ear (BTE) microphone unit that is worn on the impaired ear and a removable, custom-made in-the-mouth (ITM) hearing device worn on the upper, left or right back teeth. Both components have rechargeable batteries and a charger is included. Sound is captured and processed by the BTE microphone unit which transmits signals to the ITM hearing device. The ITM receives these signals and converts them into sound vibrations. These imperceptible sound vibrations travel via the teeth, through bones in the skull, to the functioning inner ear or cochlea, bypassing problems in the outer or middle ear entirely. As such, the device is intended to help patients with single-sided deafness (SSD) and conductive hearing loss (CHL) and has received FDA clearance for these indications. SoundBite is developed and marketed by Sonitus Medical, Inc. Single-sided deafness (SSD) and conductive hearing loss (CHL) are life-altering conditions where patients often have anxiety, depression, social isolation and reduced quality of life. SSD patients have one cochlea that is virtually non-functional. It does not hear sound even when amplified by hearing aids, which are amplification devices that simply “turn up the volume” on air-conducted sound. CHL patients have a problem with the ear (outer, middle or canal) that prohibits air conducted sound from reaching an otherwise functional cochlea and can feel pain or distortion with amplification. Therefore, the traditional treatment approach has been a prosthetic device called Baha, which replaces the function of the impaired ear by using a well-established principle called bone conduction to re-route sound through the skull bones to the functional cochlea. The Baha bone conduction prosthetic device is used rather than hearing aids because hearing aids are medically inappropriate for these patients. The Baha surgery can cause complications that range from skin reaction to infection, to abscess, to complete re-implantation or revision of the Baha post. The Medicare Benefit Policy Manual distinguishes between hearing aids and prosthetic devices, and indicates that certain devices (including Baha) are payable by Medicare as prosthetic devices when hearing aids are medically inappropriate. The principle of bone conduction has been used for many years to treat patients with single-sided deafness and conductive hearing loss. The principle is based on research showing that bone conduction stimulation of the teeth of the lower jaw initiates auditory sensations. Evidence shows that teeth vibrations lead to audio-frequency vibration transmissions via soft tissue. Those transmissions then travel through skull foramina into the skull cavity. From there, they channel into the inner ear fluids, stimulating the cochlea. Subsequently, Sonitus Medical developed SoundBite Hearing System to use those principles in a non-surgical, removable hearing system. A multi-center clinical trial conducted in 2011 validated that SoundBite is safe and effective and provides substantial benefit for individuals with single-sided deafness (SSD). Trial participants wore SoundBite for 30 days, using the device an average of 8.2 hours per day. Based on the clinical trial results, SoundBite improves the ability of individuals with SSD to understand speech in an environment with background noise by an average of 25%. One-third of the trial participants found that the system improved their hearing ability by more than 30%. The results of this extensive clinical trial showed SoundBite to be as effective as surgically implanted bone conduction systems in improving the ability to understand speech in an environment with background noise. Sound vibrations, like waves that travel across water’s surface, travel through a medium. Sound is heard when sound waves travel through the medium of air — or bones/teeth — to arrive at the inner ears. SoundBite Hearing System uses this concept known as bone conduction: the transmission of imperceptible sound vibrations through bones to the inner ears. SoundBite Hearing System is a non-surgical and removable bone conduction hearing device that re-routes sound through the teeth, through skull bone, directly to the functioning inner ear or cochlea. It by-passes problems in the outer and middle ears entirely. For patients suffering from single-sided deafness, SoundBite re-routes sound from the deaf side, to the functioning cochlea, by-passing the non-hearing side. SoundBite uses the same mechanism of action as Baha (bone conduction) only it places a transducer on the tooth —a “naturally osseointegrated” post — and thereby eliminates the need to implant a post through surgery. SoundBite relies on two primary components to deliver sound: The BTE unit has a 12-to-15-hour operational life when fully charged. Each ITM hearing device has a 6-to-8 hour operational life when fully charged. The BTE unit delivers a broader frequency bandwidth (up to 12,000 Hz) as compared to existing devices for single-sided deafness. This broader bandwidth enhances spatial hearing ability, which is a key limitation for SSD patients. The patient is evaluated by an audiologist to determine degree of hearing loss to determine if the patient is a candidate for SoundBite. A dentist then performs a dental screening and takes a partial impression of the patient's teeth, which is used to create a customized SoundBite ITM hearing device. The ITM and BTE are fitted and adjusted, and the system is programmed by a hearing professional. SoundBite is appropriate for patients who are 18 years or older, with good oral health, with: The SoundBite prosthetic device uses the established principle of bone conduction to eliminate the need for a surgery and implant, by imperceptibly transmitting sound. SoundBite delivers sound directly to the functioning inner ear (cochlea) thereby replacing the function of the impaired ear. SoundBite Hearing System is manufactured by Sonitus Medical Inc., a medical device company providing advanced hearing solutions that hearing professionals such as otolaryngologists, audiologists and otologists can use to help patients regain their hearing. Founded in June 2006, it is a privately held company based in San Mateo, California. In addition to receiving FDA clearance for SoundBite, Sonitus Medical has received CE Mark certification, which indicates Full Quality Assurance System Approval and shows that the design and manufacturing processes comply with manufacturing and design standards under the European directive concerning medical devices. 
