 The South Western Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust (SWASFT) is the organisation responsible for providing ambulance services for the National Health Service (NHS) in the English districts of Bristol, Bath and North East Somerset Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Gloucestershire, North Somerset, Scilly Isles Somerset, South Gloucestershire and Wiltshire. The Foundation Trust was authorised on 1 March 2011 by Monitor (the Independent Regulator for NHS Foundation Trusts) to run the ambulance services run previously by the NHS Trust as a result of the merger of the Westcountry and Dorset ambulance services, and the subsequent merger with neighbouring Great Western Ambulance Service on 1 February 2013. It is one of eleven Ambulance Trusts providing England with emergency medical services, receiving government funding for its role. There is no charge to patients for use of the service, although costs will be recovered and paid to the ambulance trust in cases of personal injury through the NHS Injury Cost Recovery scheme. In 2011 plans were revealed for the merger of the Great Western Ambulance Service with South Western Ambulance Service, and staff were asked to accept changes in their pay and conditions. The trust is split into three divisions: West Division covering Devon and Cornwall including West Divisional HQ, 999 and Patient Transport Service (PTS) Control at Exeter, East Division covering Somerset and Dorset including East Divisional HQ, 999 and PTS Control at Ringwood. and North Division consisting of the foot print of the former Great Western Ambulance Service NHS Trust. The Trust has 65 ambulance stations among the counties that it serves: ;Cornwall ;Devon ;Dorset ;Somerset ;Avon ;Wiltshire ;Gloucestershire The Trust is one of the largest of the new trusts formed in England in 2006. Within this, it covers of road and of coastline. In a year, over 250,000 emergency and urgent calls are received and dealt with. The Trust provides ambulance services for the Strategic Health Authority NHS South West. In addition the Trust works with the following Primary Care Trusts (PCTs) for ambulance matters: Cornwall Fire and Rescue Service, Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service and Dorset Fire and Rescue Service all work in partnership with South Western Ambulance service to provide emergency medical cover to particular areas of the Trust. These areas, often rural, have been identified as having a greater need for ambulance cover. Many of these areas do not have a local ambulance station. The aim of a co-responder teams is to preserve life until the arrival of either a Rapid Response Vehicle (RRV) or an ambulance. Co-responder vehicles are equipped with oxygen and automated external defibrillator (AED) equipment supplied by South Western Ambulance Service. The four stations that run as co-responders are Helston, Mullion, St. Keverne, and St. Mawes. Co-responder stations have got a dedicated vehicle for co-responder calls. The new vehicle known as the Emergency Response Unit (ERU), replaces the fire appliance from going, providing there are enough crew still on duty to allow the fire appliance to remain available. The 19 stations that run as co-responders are: Axminster, Chagford, Cheddar, Combe Martin, Crediton, Dawlish, Dulverton, Hartland, Hatherleigh, Holsworthy, Ivybridge, Lynton, Moretonhampstead, Nether Stowey, Porlock, Princetown, Seaton, Williton, Woolacombe The two stations that run as co-responders are Lyme Regis and Beaminster. 
