 St John Ambulance Singapore is a voluntary organisation in Singapore which provides training in First Aid and Home Nursing. Its members also perform voluntary first aid coverage duties during national events. The headquarters is located at 420 Beach Road. It was opened on July 23, 1960 by the Yang di-Pertuan Negara (and subsequently President of Singapore), En. Yusof bin Ishak. The St John Ambulance Singapore comes under the command of the National St John Council with the following appointments: Apart from promoting and assisting St. John Ambulance Association & Brigade as well as to raise the necessary funds to support their work, the main objects of the Council, are briefly as follows: In June 1978, the Brigade was reorganised and upgraded to National Headquarters level with the following appointments: This brought our organisation status at par with St. John Ambulance organisations in other independent nations. The Brigade was structured into 4 Districts and 10 Areas. In 1996, the Brigade was again re-structured. The District level was removed, and the Brigade became simply structured into 10 Zones. St John Ambulance in Singapore largely consists of cadet members - i.e. secondary school students who joined St John as their CCA. Currently, the various schools under the 10 Zones are as follows: Zone 1 (Zone Commissioner: Ms Nancy Low Bee Lian, S.S.St.J.) Zone 2 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Cheng Chung Hsien, S.B.St.J.) Zone 3 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Derek Tan, S.B.St.J.) Zone 4 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Eric Koh Siak Hong, PK, PBS, S.B.St.J.) Zone 5 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Frederick Lim Yew Soon, S.B.St.J.) Zone 6 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Jerry Ko, S.B.St.J.) Zone 7 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Kuo Keng Huat, O.St.J.) Zone 8 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Chin Chee Wah, S.B.St.J.) Zone 9 (Zone Commissioner: Mr Yong Cheng Thye, S.B.St.J.) Zone 10 (Zone Commissioner: Ms Wendy Neo Lay Cheng, O.St.J.) As St John the Baptist Day, June 24 normally falls during the Singapore School Holidays, St John Cadets observe St John Ambulance Brigade Day on the first Wednesday after school reopens. On that day, all St John Ambulance Brigade members in schools will report to school in Brigade Uniform, and the St John Day Message by the Chief Commissioner will be read out by the Principal or a student leader. On that day, St John members reaffirm their loyalty to the Republic of Singapore and affirm their commitment to the mottoes of the Order, 'For the Faith' and 'For the Service of Mankind'. Typically, St John cadets in Singapore learn First Aid, Home Nursing, Transportation of Casualties and footdrill as part of their core syllabus. They also have the opportunity to go on other enrichment activities such as camping trips where they can earn proficiency badges 1. Outstanding members may also vie for the prestigious Chief Commissioner's Badge, which is only attainable after obtaining 12 proficiency badges according to a set of strict criteria. To be loyal to Singapore and the President of the Republic To upkeep the honour and dignity of the Brigade and my Country To observe the mottoes of the Order, which are "Pro Fide" – For the Faith, "Pro Utilitate Hominum" – For the Service of Mankind To be loyal to the Chief Commissioner and all my Officers To read the Brigade Regulations and to comply with them in all respects To carry out all orders received from time to time from seniors To carry out my duties with zeal and efficiency to the best of my ability To be courteous and honest in all my words and actions The objective of the Cadet Proficiency Badge Scheme is to encourage cadet members to take an interest in subjects outside their normal curriculum and to widen their interests by carrying out these activities in their leisure time. Such activities may also be organized by their respective Corps/Zones. Certain activities are also organized by the NHQ. The proficiency badges are divided into 4 groups as follow: Group 1 : Welfare and Service Group 2 : Outdoor Activities Group 3 : Crafts and Hobbies Group 4 : General Achievement Badges Upon participation in any of the following activities: - SYF Parade - National Day Parade - Brigade Camp (National Level) - Inter-Zone(i.e. National) First Aid and Home Nursing Competition - Uniformed Groups Heritage Trail Upon obtaining 4 proficiency badges from each of the four categories (excluding the Knowledge of The Order) and the National Activity Badge. Upon obtaining 6 proficiency badges(at least one from each category + the Knowledge of The Order) and meeting the following criteria: - Must not be above 20 years of age on the date of qualifying for the badge Upon obtaining 12 proficiency badges(at least two from Category I & II, no more than two from Category III + Knowledge of The Order) and meeting the following criteria: - Must not be above 20 years of age on the date of qualifying for the badge In 2005, the policy on wearing of achievement badges was revised to allow members to continue wearing the Chief Commissioner Badge even after they are promoted to an officer. An annual first-aid-competition among schools is held in each of the 10 zones. There are 4 categories to the competition. The champions of each category go on to represent their Zone in the Inter-Zone First Aid Competition. The various Zones conduct Inter-Corps First Aid Competition amongst themselves to decide which Corps gets to represent them at the Inter-Zone First Aid Competition, usually held in July. The following table lists the various champions for 2013. The present uniform consists of a white top and black bottom for all members of the Brigade. For the Cadet and Adult members' headdress, a black beret bearing either the Cadet or the Adult cap badge is worn. Nursing (female) members are also encouraged to wear hairnets, especially during major parades. The top consists of a white sleeved shirt/blouse with silver buttons bearing the SJAB insignia. Shoulder flashes bearing the Maltese Cross are worn on both sleeves. Epaulettes bearing the Cadet/Adult members' rank are worn on the shoulders. The bottom consists of black pants for Ambulance (Male) members and black culottes for Nursing (Female) members. Black socks and shoes complete the uniform for members. Lady officers have the option of wearing court shoes for functions (i.e. when not on parade or duty.) Officers and Warrant Officers have altogether 4 different uniforms: All ranks are either worn on the shoulder board or as slot-in epaulettes. Officers and Members of the Brigade are eligible for the following Awards and Commendations: The grades of the Order are numbered 1 through 6, however this is not to be confused with the grading of Brigade Officers. The highest grade in the Order, G.C.St.J. is limited only to the Great Officers of the Order and 21 other individuals. The lowest grade in the Order, Esq.St.J. is for Personal Esquires for K.St.J. and above who probably play a role similar to that of an Aide-de-Camp. The allotment is as follows: 2 Personal Esquires for Knights of Justice and above, and 1 Personal Esquire for Knights of Grace. No Personal Esquires have been appointed in Singapore. (1997 edition) 
