 St. Martinus University Faculty of Medicine (SMUFOM) is a private university located in Willemstad, Curaçao, in the Caribbean. St. Martinus confers upon its graduates the Doctor of Medicine (MD) degree. Originally St. Martinus College, a Catholic girls' school, the university was transformed into its current role as a medical school by a John Daryanani-led group at the request of the local Roman Catholic Church, and established as St. Martinus University on May 22, 2000. In October 2005, Daryanani said the school had half the number of students it needed to break even, and in October 2007, Banco de Caribe announced an auction of the university property. Daryanani began seeking a new buyer for the school and in early 2008, Henry Chau, the chairman and CEO of the Maple Leaf Investment Fund, was appointed as new chairman of the university. Chau left in April 2009, citing differences with Daryanani, and the university briefly closed. In 2010, SMU reopened under the administration of Priyamvada Sharma, who currently serves as the university's managing director. The MD program at St. Martinus University consists of four 20-week semesters of basic sciences that are completed at the university's Curacao campus, and 80 weeks of clinical clerkships that are completed at affiliated hospitals in the United States. St. Martinus also offers a one year pre-medical program for high school graduates who have not completed the necessary prerequisites for the MD program. St. Martinus University was chartered by the Government of the Netherlands Antilles in 2001 and recognized by the Curacao Ministry of Health in 2005. St. Martinus University is listed in the FAIMER International Medical Education Directory (IMED) and in the AVICENNA Directory for medicine. St. Martinus University is recognized as a designated educational institution by the Canada Student Loans Program (CSLP). On April 16, 2013, the Medical Council of India listed St. Martinus University Faculty of Medicine as an institution whose graduates are ineligible for the Medical Council of India Screening Test. 
