 Stargardt disease, or fundus flavimaculatus, is an inherited form of juvenile macular degeneration that causes progressive vision loss usually to the point of legal blindness. The progression usually starts between the ages of six and twelve years old and plateaus shortly after rapid reduction in visual acuity. Several genes are associated with the disorder. Symptoms typically develop by twenty years of age, and include wavy vision, blind spots, blurriness, impaired color vision, and difficulty adapting to dim lighting. Stargardt disease is associated with several different genes: The classification "STGD2" is no longer used. The main symptom of Stargardt disease is loss of visual acuity, which ranges from 20/50 to 20/200. Those with Stargardt disease are sensitive to glare; overcast days offer some relief. Vision is most noticeably impaired when the macula (center of retina and focus of vision) is damaged, leaving peripheral vision more intact. Symptoms usually appear before age 20. Symptoms include wavy vision, blind spots, blurriness, impaired color vision, and difficulty adapting to dim lighting. No treatments are available for Stargardt's disease. Many patients use magnifiers to help them see, and wear sunglasses to slow the development. The genetic defect is manifest in the visual phototransduction cycle. The ATP-binding cassette transporter is defective and leads to a build up of a toxic metabolite lipofuscin in the retinal pigmented epithelium. The form of Stargardt's disease that involves a butterfly pattern of dystrophy is caused by a mutation in a gene that codes a membrane bound protein that is involved in the elongation of very long chain fatty acids (ELOVL4). The disease was discovered in 1909 by Karl Stargardt, an ophthalmologist in Berlin. In 1997, it was discovered that mutations in the gene cause Stargardt. The mutations cause the production of a dysfunctional protein that cannot perform energy transport to and from photoreceptor cells in the retina. The photoreceptor cells then degenerate, causing vision loss. Stargardt disease is the most common form of inherited juvenile macular degeneration. The long-term prognosis for patients with Stargardt disease is widely variable. Stargardt disease has no impact on general health and longevity is normal. Some patients are able to drive. On November 22, 2010, it was announced that Advanced Cell Technology received United States Food and Drug Administration clearance to immediately initiate a Phase I/II multicenter clinical trial using retinal cells derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to treat patients with Stargardt’s Macular Dystrophy. In Sept 2011 ACT announced they were beginning the next stage of treatment for SMD, and Dry AMD as the first stage proved to be safe by an independent board of experts. In March 2013, after treating and collecting data on 18 patients, Advanced Cell was given approval to test its stem cell therapy on patients with 20/100 vision. 
