 The State University of New York Upstate Medical University is a State University of New York university of health sciences in the University Hill district of Syracuse, New York, USA. SUNY Upstate is an upper-division transfer and graduate college with degree programs within the College of Medicine, College of Nursing, College of Health Professions, and the College of Graduate Studies. Its Syracuse campus includes University Hospital. In addition to affiliations with Binghamton Hospital and 22 other hospitals throughout central New York, where much of the core clinical teaching takes place, Upstate has numerous partnerships, including a joint PhD Program in Biomedical Engineering with Syracuse University; science enrichment programs for local youth in tandem with the SC Hope Clinic; and SUNY ESF. Upstate has been an engine of opportunity for students, workers, and the wider Central New York community. It directly generates 10,117 jobs, making it the Central New York's largest employer. The present-day university's earliest predecessor was Geneva Medical College founded 1834 as part of Geneva College, today known as Hobart and William Smith Colleges. The new medical college was located in Geneva, New York, and became the first college to grant a full M.D. to a woman, Elizabeth Blackwell, in 1849. In 1871 the college was disbanded and its assets donated to the recently-founded Syracuse University, which subsequently founded a medical college. In 1950 Syracuse University sold the college to the State University of New York (SUNY), where it remains today. After carrying the names "SUNY Upstate Medical Center" (initially) and "SUNY Health Science Center at Syracuse" (1986), the institution was renamed to its present nomenclature in 1999. A clinical campus in Binghamton, New York, was established in 1979. A plaque in the lobby of Weiskotten Hall aptly describes one of the institution's driving philosophies: "Dedicated to all those of scientific mind and investigative spirit who purpose to serve humanity." The university's main campus is located in downtown Syracuse, New York flanking Interstate 81. It includes the University Hospital, the Institute for Human Performance, Setnor Academic Building, Central New York Gamma Knife Center, Jacobsen Hall, Regional Oncology Center, Upstate Golisano Children's Hospital, Weiskotten Hall (which includes the Health Sciences Library), Silverman Hall and Clark Tower dormitory for 170 students. A clinical campus in Binghamton, New York was established in 1979. Medical students spend their first two years of medical school in Syracuse, New York and then approximately a quarter of the class completes their training in Binghamton. The College of Medicine is one of the oldest medical schools in New York. More physicians practicing in Central New York received their training here than at any other medical school. Upstate also ranks eighth nationally for the number of graduates who are on the faculty at academic medical centers across the country. The Colleges of Nursing and Health Professions also play a unique role in the life of the Central New York. The College of Nursing offers graduate programs in: nurse practitioner (family and psychiatric), and clinical nurse specialist. The College of Health Professions is the gateway for students seeking to enter some of the most competitive and highly paid careers in health care today: Physician Assistant (MS), Physical Therapy (DPT), Cardiovascular Perfusion (BS), Medical Technology (BS and MS), Medical Biotechnology (BS), Radiation Therapy (BS and BPS), Respiratory Therapy (BS), Medical Imaging (BS and BPS), and Ultrasound (BS and BPS). The School of Graduate Studies is known for its excellence in basic science education and research. Students have the opportunity to work side by side with many of the top neuroscientists and basic researchers in the country. The university operates the Southern Tier Center on Aging in conjunction with the SUNY Binghamton. The Center develops, implements and evaluates new interventions and models of service delivery geared to enhancing quality of life of older adults and their caregivers. The current president is David Smith, MD. 
