 Stimuvax® (also known as L-BLP25 or BLP25 Liposome Vaccine) is an investigational therapeutic cancer vaccine designed to induce an immune response to cancer cells that express MUC1, a glycoprotein antigen widely expressed on common cancers. MUC1 is over-expressed on many cancers such as lung cancer, breast cancer, prostate cancer and colorectal cancer. Stimuvax is thought to work by stimulating the body's immune system to identify and destroy cancer cells expressing MUC1. Phase IIb clinical trial of 171 patients with inoperable stage IIIb non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), in which Stimuvax showed a trend towards extending median overall survival from 13.3 months for patients receiving best supportive care (BSC) to 30.6 months for patients receiving Stimuvax plus BSC. This result, from a subset of on stage 3b patients in the study, was not, however, statistically significant (p = 0.16, J. Thorac. Oncol., 2(8):S199-S201, August 2007). Reported side effects included mild-to-moderate flu-like symptoms, gastrointestinal disturbances, and mild injection-site reactions. On December 19, 2012, Merck Serono, a division of Merck KGaA of Darmstadt, Germany, and Oncothyreon announced that the pivotal Phase III clinical trial of L-BLP25 (formerly referred to as Stimuvax®) known as START did not meet its primary endpoint of an improvement in overall survival in patients with unresectable, locally advanced stage IIIA or stage IIIB non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The trial was conducted by Merck Serono. Despite not meeting the primary endpoint, notable treatment effects were seen in certain subgroups. Further analyses are planned to explore the potential benefit-risk profile. This data will be discussed with external experts and regulatory authorities over the coming months. More detailed results from the START trial will be submitted for publication in a peer reviewed journal and presentation at upcoming scientific meetings. A thirty-site phase III trial (STRIDE) began in 2009 on 900 women (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00925548) The purpose of this study is to determine whether the addition of the experimental cancer vaccine Stimuvax to hormonal treatment is effective in prolonging progression-free survival in postmenopausal women with endocrine-sensitive inoperable locally advanced, recurrent or metastatic breast cancer. A randomised, open label, pharmacodynamics study evaluating L-BLP25 (Stimuvax) in Rectal Cancer (SPRINT) started in January 2012 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01507103. The objective of this trial is to induce an immune response that may lead to immune rejection of tumor tissues that aberrantly express MUC1 antigen. MUC1 is highly expressed in all colorectal cancers and since the adaptive immune system plays a role in the prognosis of rectal cancer, it is reasonable to speculate that the vaccination with L BLP25 might boost the tumor-specific immune response and increase the number of TILs. The estimated study completion date of this study is June 2013. Stimuvax (L-BLP25) is also examined in combination with standard treatment for prostate cancer (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01496131). This randomized Phase II safety/efficacy study of L-BLP25 in combination with standard androgen deprivation therapy and radiation therapy is designed for newly diagnosed, high risk prostate cancer patients. The study started in November 2011 and is estimated to be completed in January 2016. Merck obtained the exclusive worldwide rights for development and commercialization of L-BLP25 from Oncothyreon Inc., Seattle, Washington, USA, in 2007, in an agreement replacing prior collaboration and supply agreements originally entered in 2001. In Japan, Merck entered into a co-development and co-marketing agreement for L-BLP25 with Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan. 
