 The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) is a branch of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. It is charged with improving the quality and availability of prevention, treatment, and rehabilitative services in order to reduce illness, death, disability, and cost to society resulting from substance abuse and mental illnesses. The Administrator of SAMHSA reports directly to the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. SAMHSA's headquarters building is located in Rockville, Maryland. SAMHSA was established in 1992 by Congress as part of a reorganization of the Federal administration of mental health services; the new law renamed the former Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA). ADAMHA had passed through a series of name changes and organizational arrangements throughout its history: Congress directed SAMHSA to target effectively substance abuse and mental health services to the people most in need and to translate research in these areas more effectively and rapidly into the general health care system. Charles Curie was SAMHSA's Director until his resignation in May 2006. In December 2006 Terry Cline was appointed as SAMHSA's Director. Dr. Cline served through August 2008. Rear Admiral Eric Broderick served as the Acting Director upon Dr. Cline's departure, until the arrival of the succeeding Administrator, Pamela S. Hyde, J.D. in November 2009. SAMHSA's mission is to reduce the impact of substance abuse and mental illness on American's communities. To accomplish its work, SAMHSA administers a combination of competitive, formula, and block grant programs and data collection activities. The Agency's programs are carried out through: Together these units support U.S. States, Territories, Tribes, communities, and local organizations through grant and contract awards. They also provide national leadership in promoting the provision of quality behavioral-health services. Major activities to improve the quality and availability of prevention, treatment, and recovery-support services, are funded through competitive Programs of Regional and National Significance grants. A number of supporting offices complement the work of the four Centers: In 2010, SAMHSA identified 8 Strategic Initiatives to focus the Agency's work. Below are the 8 areas and goals associated with each category: Their budget for the Fiscal Year 2010 was about $3.6 billion. It was re-authorized for FY2011. In February 2004, the administration was accused of requiring the name change of an Oregon mental health conference from "Suicide Prevention Among Gay/Lesbian/Bisexual/Transgender Individuals" to "Suicide Prevention in Vulnerable Populations." In 2002, then-President George W. Bush established the New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. The resulting report was intended to provide the foundation for the federal government's Mental Health Services programs. However, many experts and advocates were highly critical of its report, "Achieving the Promise: Transforming Mental Health Care in America". 
