 A substance-related disorder is a condition (such as intoxication, harmful use/abuse, dependence, withdrawal, and psychoses or amnesia associated with the use of the substance) associated with substance abuse, often involving maladaptive behaviors over a long period of time. In order to be diagnosed with substance dependence an individual must display at least three of the following for a 12 month period: "development of tolerance to the substance, withdrawal symptoms, persistent desire/unsuccessful attempts to stop using the substance, ingestion of larger amounts of substance, declined life functioning, and persistent use of substance." Substance abuse has been found to be most common among people 18 to 25 years of age and is also more common in males than females and in urban residents compared to those who live in rural areas. Over 50 percent of individuals with substance abuse issues have been found to have another psychiatric disorder, something that is termed Comorbid Psychiatric Diagnosis. Substance abuse is not the same in every person; it can differ in terms of the substance abused, the pattern of use and also the type of comorbid illness present, if any. Substance-related disorders can be subcategorized into "substance use disorders" (SUD) and "substance-induced disorders" (SID). Though DSM-IV makes a firm distinction between the two, SIDs often occur in the context of SUDs. Some people can have strong drug cravings even after they have not used the drug for a long period of time. They call this being "clean". To figure out how the brain triggers these cravings they have done multiple test on mice. Substance-related disorders, including both substance dependence and substance abuse, can lead to large societal problems. It is found to be greatest in individuals ages 18–25, with a higher likelihood occurring in men compared to women, and urban residents compared to rural residents. On average, general medical facilities hold 20% of patients with substance-related disorders, possibly leading to psychiatric disorders later on. Over 50% of individuals with substance-related disorders will often have a "dual diagnosis," where they are diagnosed with the substance abuse, as well as a psychiatric diagnosis, the most common being major depression, personality disorder, anxiety disorders, and dysthymia. Substance-induced disorders include medical conditions that can be directly attributed to the use of a substance. These conditions include intoxication, withdrawal, substance-induced delirium, substance-induced psychosis, and substance-induced mood disorders. An abnormal condition affecting the body of an organism: For instance, there are several known alcohol-induced diseases (eg alcoholic hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease, alcoholic cardiomyopathy.) ] Substance use disorders include substance abuse and substance dependence. In DSM-IV, the conditions are formally diagnosed as one or the other, but it has been proposed that DSM-V combine the two into a single condition called "Substance-use disorder". 
