 Surgical Outcomes Analysis & Research, SOAR, is a research laboratory of the Department of Surgery at the University of Massachusetts Medical School with expertise in outcomes research. SOAR investigates surgical diseases and perioperative outcomes. The group focuses on pancreatic cancer as well as other gastrointestinal and hepatobiliary malignancies. SOAR's goal is to examine quality, delivery, and financing of care in order to have an immediate impact on patient care and system improvements. The group members utilize national health services and administrative databases, as well as prospective institutional tissue-linked databases, to investigate and to address factors contributing to disease outcomes and healthcare disparities. The work in SOAR incorporates advanced statistical techniques, including logistic regression, prediction score, and decision analysis modeling. Additionally, SOAR participates in groundbreaking pancreatic cancer biomarker discovery. With rigorous proteomic assessment of blood, bile, and pancreatic fluid, they aspire to utilize biomarkers that will enable early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and reliably predict patient response to treatment. Outcomes Research evaluates the impact of health care on the health outcomes of patients and populations AHRQ. This research may also include the evaluation of economic impacts linked to health outcomes, such as cost effectiveness and cost utility. An emphasis is placed on disease-oriented evaluations of care delivered in general, real-world settings. There are a wide range of outcomes to study including mortality, morbidity, functional status, mental well-being, and other aspects of health-related quality of life. Outcomes research is a multidisciplinary field of inquiry that examines the use, quality, delivery, and financing of health care services to increase knowledge and understanding of the structure, processes, and effects of health services for individuals and populations. Outcomes research provides the data to help solve critical problems that are faced in everyday clinical practice. The information learned can have an immediate impact on patient care and system improvement. The mission of SOAR is to decrease perioperative morbidity and mortality, address health care disparities, and increase overall patient survival and quality of life. SOAR members hope, as part of the surgical outcomes research community, to improve overall outcomes for patients with surgical diseases. SOAR director, Dr. Jennifer F. Tseng, has been supported by the Pancreatic Cancer Alliance through the UMass Cancer Center and the Department of Cancer Biology, and has a mandate to focus substantial effort on improving survival and quality of life for pancreatic cancer patients. She has spearheaded an integrated UMass Pancreas Program, a unique endeavor to Central Massachusetts. SOAR coinvestigators at UMass include: Dr. Fred Anderson, Director of the Center for Outcomes Research; Dr. Giles Whalen, Vice-Chair of Surgery and Chief of Surgical Oncology and Endocrine Surgery; Dr. Shimul Shah, Transplant Surgery, Dr. Karim Alavi, Colorectal Surgery, and Dr. Heena Santry, MD, Trauma Surgery. The group also collaborates with investigators from other institutions. UMass Medical School, located in Worcester, is one of five University of Massachusetts campuses, and one of about 28 free-standing, university-based academic health science centers in the U.S. Ranked fourth in the nation in primary care education in the 2006 U.S. News & World Report's “America's Best Graduate Schools,” UMMS comprises three schools - the School of Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences and the Graduate School of Nursing. See also: UMass Medical School Website SOAR researchers use national health services and administrative databases as well as prospective institutional tissue-linked databases to investigate factors contributing to disease outcomes for pancreatic cancer, hepato biliary disease, vascular disease, colorectal disease and brain tumors. These projects are under development with the use of the following databases: For more detailed information refer to SOAR- publications. Surgery 
