 Tenovus is a British cancer charity committed to the control of cancer through quality research, prevention/education, counselling and patient care. Tenovus was established in 1943 by ten businessmen (hence the 'ten-of-us'). The charity initially funded a range of projects, however in 1964 Tenovus embarked on a project which was to influence their work over the next 40 years. D.R. Edwards, the founder Chairman of the group of ten, cut the first sod on the site of the Tenovus Institute for Cancer Research in Cardiff. Since then, Tenovus have concentrated their efforts on cancer and Tenovus scientists have been recognised for their pioneering work. Nowadays Tenovus remains the biggest Wales-based funder of cancer research and has also developed a range of services to support cancer patients directly, including a Freephone Cancer Support Line (0808 808 1010), free counselling, benefits advice, a Mobile Cancer Support Unit and the 'Sing With Us' choirs. Tenovus has funded world class cancer research for over 40 years. Tenovus funded scientists have contributed to discoveries that have helped treat and care for millions of cancer patients all around the world. Tenovus now spends around £1M on research each year both on laboratory research to help develop new treatments for cancer, and research in the community to help local people and their families. The Mobile Cancer Support Unit was launched in February 2009. Since its launch, the Unit has opened its services in over 50 locations and has accommodated over 5,000 patients and visitors. Working with Velindre NHS Trust, Tenovus has been delivering chemotherapy and other cancer treatments in Cwmbran and Nantgarw. During this period, over 1,500 treatments have been provided. Tenovus' Cancer Support Team is unique in the way it provides help, guidance and support through its multi-disciplinary service, allowing patients and their families to access a number of services directly through the charity. Their staff provide advice about welfare benefits for cancer patients and give free counselling, as well as running various support groups. Tenovus have a national Freephone Cancer Support Line (0808 808 1010), which is open 8am-8pm, 7 days a week. They more recently launched a proactive telephone chemotherapy callback service (Tenovus Cancer Callback) where a Tenovus Cancer Nurse Specialist contacts cancer patients throughout their treatment to provide advice and support. In 2012 Tenovus launched the 'Sing With Us' project, funded by the Big Lottery, to run 15 choirs across Wales for cancer patients, survivors, their families and people bereaved through cancer. Initial research conducted by Cardiff University and Tenovus has proved that singing in the choirs reduces anxiety and pain, as well as helping to improve physical function. Tenovus' work in this area also featured in the October 2012 Channel 4 documentary 'Sing For Your Life', where the charity set up a choir of cancer patients that performed at the Royal Albert Hall. A separate organisation, Tenovus Scotland, was established in 1967. Since then Tenovus Scotland has raised over £10.5 million for medical research. 
