 Tetrachlorodecaoxide (TCDO) is a chlorite containing drug used for the dressing of wounds, immunomodulation and as radiation protective agent. It is the active principle of the drug Oxoferin made by Brookes Pharmaceutical Laboratories (Pakistan) Ltd under license from Oxo Chemie GmbH. In May 2002, Oxo Chemie was acquired by Dimethaid Research Inc, (now Nuvo Research Inc). Several chlorooxygen compounds, hydrogen peroxide and reducing molecules in the presence of chelated iron (Fenton systems) are oxidants of biological relevance. Hemoglobin of the red cells has such iron and activates TCDO. It is available as sterile solution for topical use in 1:55 dilution. Due to its oxidizing properties, TCDO can destroy most pathogens although it is not regarded as antibiotic. But the main reason for its use for dressing of wounds is not its bactericidal activity. This drug is regarded as immunomodulating, that is, it acts by stimulating the immune system of the body. Tetrachlorodecaoxide combines with the haem part of hemoglobin, myoglobin and peroxidase, forming a TCDO-haemo complex. This in turn activates the macrophages and accelerates the process of phagocytosis which engulfs most of the pathogens and cell debris present on the surface of the wound, thus cleaning the wound surface and helping in the regenerative process. Tetrachlorodecaoxide is also mitogenic and chemotactic. The mitogenic impulse gives rise to two factors, MDGF(Macrophage derived growth factor) and WAF (Wound angiogenesis factor). The MDGF deposits fibroblasts and synthesizes collagen fibers which fills the gap in the wounds, the WAF helps in the formation of new capillaries which further enhances the healing process. The chemotactic impulse acts on the myocyte (muscle cell) and causes it to contract, thereby bringing the wound edges closer and reducing the wound surface. Simultaneous influence of all these factors accelerate the wound healing with minimal scarring. WF 10 [Immunokine, Macrokine] is a 1 : 10 dilution of tetrachlorodecaoxide (TCDO) formulated for intravenous injection. It was developed by Oxo Chemie in Switzerland as an adjunctive therapy to combination antiretroviral and opportunistic infection prophylaxis regimens in AIDS patients. WF 10 specifically targets macrophages. WF10 potentially modulates disease-related up-regulation of immune responses both in vitro and in vivo. Thus immune response is influenced in a way that inappropriate inflammatory reactions are downregulated. WF10 is currently being studied in the United States, Europe and Asia for treatment of late-stage HIV disease, as well as recurrent prostate cancer, late post-radiation cystitis, autoimmune disease and chronic active hepatitis C disease. Oxo Chemie has worldwide patent rights to WF 10 and Dimethaid Research has an exclusive license for marketing and distribution in Canada. WF 10 is approved for use in Thailand under the name IMMUNOKINE in patients with postradiation chronic inflammatory disease including cystitis, proctitis and mucositis. Tetrachlorodecaoxide produces methaemoglobin even if diluted 500 fold, and leads to additional alterations if added in high concentrations to red cells. Ancloximex, Animexan, Balneozoon, Dermazoon, DesoPur, HydroXan, LegioCid, Oxilium, Oxocebron, Oxoferin, Oxomexan, Oxovasin, Oxovir, Oxoviron, Ryoxon, WF10. 
