 Thomas Edward Radecki, MD, JD (b. 1946) is an American psychiatrist and founding member of the National Coalition on TV Violence. He is known for his controversial views on the effects of portrayals of violence on teens. Radecki is profoundly against depictions of violence in any form. He has been quoted in numerous books and news articles to that effect. He attended Ohio State College of Medicine, (class of '73), where he received his MD. His postgraduate education was done at the Philadelphia General Hospital (06/30/1974) and the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania (06/30/1976). He received his JD after studies at the Oklahoma City University School of Law (1995-1996), and the Southern Illinois University School of Law (1996-1998). He practiced or was licensed to practice as a doctor in West Virginia (1977-1979) and Kentucky. In 1985 Radecki cited a fictitious letter written by a character in the novel Mazes and Monsters as "proof" that the game Dungeons & Dragons had caused the death of gamers. In 1987 he testified as an expert on the effects of Dungeons & Dragons on behalf of Darren Molitor (convicted of murder in 1985) at an appeal, along with Patricia Pulling. The court rejected his testimony. He also testified at at least 12 other cases, all unsuccessfully. It later emerged that he was not actually a doctor at the University of Illinois College of Medicine, and that the title was honorary, signifying that he was accredited to practice at a teaching hospital. His status there was removed in 1985. In March 1992, the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation revoked his medical license for a five year minimum as a result of his "engaging in immoral conduct of an unprofessional nature with a patient". Radecki resigned from NCTV, turning it over to a colleague, Carole Lieberman. His request for early reinstatement of his license was later rejected, following complaints about his Surrogate Parenting Institute, a fertility clinic. His license was later restored in 2002, and he was placed on probation, which ended in 2008. Radecki has been involved with Doctors & Lawyers for a Drug Free Youth since 1991, as a Research Director. He was also RD for the International Coalition Against Violent Entertainment, which published a 1988 study of films and the level of violence therein, as well as a board member of the Parents Music Resource Center. He continues to practise as a psychiatrist in Clarion, Pennsylvania, specializing in addiction medicine. He has advocated for the use of Tramadol as a replacement of Suboxone. In September 2012, Radecki voluntarily surrendered his Pennsylvania medical license, while facing allegations of unprofessional conduct with patients. The allegations included claims Radecki traded drugs to patients in exchange for sex. He is well known for the following quote: 
