 Thrombophlebitis is phlebitis (vein inflammation) related to a thrombus (blood clot). When it occurs repeatedly in different locations, it is known as "Thrombophlebitis migrans" or "migrating thrombophlebitis". The following symptoms are often (but not always) associated with thrombophlebitis: Thrombophlebitis (another medical term is "White Leg") is related to a thrombus in the vein. Risk factors include disorders related to increased tendency for blood clotting, injury to vein wall and reduced speed of blood in the veins such as varices and prolonged immobility. Prolonged traveling by car or airplane may promote a blood clot leading to thrombophlebitis but this occurs relatively rarely. Specific disorders associated with thrombophlebitis include superficial thrombophlebitis (affects veins near the skin surface) and deep venous thrombosis (affects deeper, larger veins). Thrombophlebitis migrans can be a non-metastatic manifestation of malignancies such as pancreatic carcinoma (Trousseau sign of malignancy). The health care provider makes the diagnosis primarily based on the appearance of the affected area. Frequent checks of the pulse, blood pressure, temperature, skin condition, and circulation may be required. If the cause is not readily identifiable, tests may be performed to determine the cause, including the following: Routine changing of intravenous (IV) lines helps to prevent phlebitis related to IV lines. See the specific disorders associated with thrombophlebitis for other preventive measures. For more specific recommendations, see the particular condition. In general, treatment may include the following: The patient may be advised to do the following: Thrombophlebitis and other forms of phlebitis usually respond to prompt medical treatment. Not all superficial thrombophlebitis is benign Complications are rare, but when they occur they can be serious. The most serious complication occurs when the blood clot dislodges, traveling through the heart and occluding the dense capillary network of the lungs; this is a pulmonary embolism which can be potentially life threatening. 
