 Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a 660 kDa, dimeric protein produced by and used entirely within the thyroid gland. Tg bound to T3 and/or T4 is sometimes called a colloid. Thyroglobulin should not be confused with Thyroxine-binding globulin, a carrier protein responsible for carrying the thyroid hormones in the blood. Tg is used by the thyroid gland to produce the thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). The active form of triiodothyronine, 3, 5, 3' triiodothyronine, is produced both within the thyroid gland and in the periphery by 5'-deiodinase (which has been referred to as tetraiodothyronine 5' deiodinase). It is presumed that Tg and thyroid are also an important storage of iodine for all body needs, in particular, for many iodine-concentrating organs such as breast, stomach, salivary glands, thymus, choroid plexus and cerebrospinal fluid, etc. (see iodine in biology). In fact, the Tg molecule, which contains approximately 120 tyrosyl residues, is able to form only very small amounts of thyroid hormone (5-6 molecules of T4 and T3). Tg is produced by the thyroid epithelial cells, called thyrocytes, which form spherical follicles. Tg is secreted and stored in the follicular lumen. Via a reaction with the enzyme thyroperoxidase, iodine is covalently bound to tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin molecules, forming monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). Small globules of the follicular colloid (Tg) are endocytosed (hormone (TSH)-mediated) and proteases in lysosomes digest iodinated thyroglobulin, releasing T3 and T4 within the thyrocyte cytoplasm. The T3 and T4 are then transported across (TSH-mediated) the basolateral thyrocyte membrane, into the bloodstream, by an unknown mechanism while the lysosome is recycled back to the follicular lumen. Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (ATA), frequently referred to as TgAb, are often found in patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Graves' disease. Tg-specific antibodies help in the diagnosis of these diseases, but they also may be present in apparently healthy euthyroid individuals. Tg-specific antibodies are also found in patients with Hashimoto's Encephalopathy, a neuro-endocrine disorder related to - but not caused by - Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Thyroglobulin levels in the blood can be used as a tumor marker for certain kinds of thyroid cancer (particularly papillary or follicular thyroid cancer). Thyroglobulin is not produced by medullary or anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. Circulating thyroglobulin has a half-life of 65 hours. Following thyroidectomy, it may take many weeks before thyroglobulin levels become undetectable. After thyroglobulin levels become undetectable following thyroidectomy, levels can be serially monitored. A subsequent elevation of the thyroglobulin level is an indication of recurrence of papillary or follicular thyroid carcinoma. Metabolism of thyroglobulin occurs in the liver and via thyroid gland recycling of the protein. In the clinical laboratory, thyroglobulin testing can be complicated by the presence of anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (present in 1 in 10 normal individuals and a greater percentage of patients with thyroid carcinoma). The presence of these antibodies can result in falsely low levels on thyroglobulin testing (rarely, levels can appear falsely increased- macro-thyroglobulin mechanism). This problem can be somewhat circumvented by testing for the presence of anti-thryroglobulin antibodies. In patients with anti-thyroglobulin antibodies, a better strategy is to not rely on any single lab result but instead to follow serial quantitative measurements. This can help a clinician/clinical pathologist interpret a test and manage patient care, even with the presence of the confounding factor of thyroglobulin antibodies. Thyroglobulin has been shown to interact with Binding immunoglobulin protein. 
