 The Touro College of Osteopathic medicine (TOUROCOM) is an American osteopathic medical school located in the neighborhood of Central Harlem in New York City, New York. The university's inaugural class was in 2007 and graduated its first class in 2011. It currently has a student body of about 514 students. The school is a division of Touro College. The school has a stated goal of particularly identifying and recruiting students willing to make a commitment to practice in underserved communities, such as Harlem. Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine offers the degree of Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine and a Master of Science in Interdisciplinary Studies in Biological and Physical Sciences, a one year curriculum focused on core sciences with the aim of preparing students for the College of Osteopathic Medicine. Matriculants to the Class of 2013 for the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine program had an average MCAT of 27 and GPA of 3.3 and 43% of matriculants were New York residents. Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine is located at 230 West 125th Street, diagonally across from the famed Apollo Theater in Manhattan's historic Harlem neighborhood. Its facility provides approximately devoted to medical education. The school contains amphitheater-style lecture halls, classrooms, offices, support facilities, clinical skills training facilities, and laboratories. The virtual library includes more than 50,000 books and 1,000 journals, 26,000 electronic journals, virtual resources, more than 80 computer workstations, multimedia areas, and reading spaces. In May 2009, students from Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine worked with DKMS Americas (along with assistance from the Harlem community and the Apollo Theater) to arrange a Bone Marrow Registration Drive that resulted in about 200 new bone marrow registrants. The drive was inspired by the need to find a bone marrow donor match for Jasmina Anema, a six year old African American girl fighting leukemia. Jasmina died Jan 27, 2010 at 10:55pm. Touro College of Osteopathic Medicine is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education and received the status of initial award of accreditation from the American Osteopathic Association's Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation. (COCA). 
