 Toxicity Class refers to a classification system for pesticides that has been created by a national or international government-related or -sponsored organization. It addresses the acute toxicity of agents such as soil fumigants, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, miticides, molluscicides, nematicides, or rodenticides. Assignment to a Toxicity Class is based typically on results of acute toxicity studies such as the determination of values in animal experiments, notably rodents, via oral, inhaled, or external application. The experimental design measures the acute death rate of an agent. The Toxicity Class generally does not address issues of other potential harm of the agent, such as bioaccumulation, issues of carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, mutagenic effects, or the impact on reproduction. Regulating agencies may require that packaging of the agent be labeled with a Signal Word, a specific warning label to indicate the level of toxicity. The United States Environmental Protection Agency uses four Toxicity Classes. Classes I to III are required to carry a Signal Word on the label. Pesticides are regulated by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Class I materials are estimated to be fatal to an adult human at a dose of less than 5 grams (less than a teaspoon). Class II materials are estimated to be fatal to an adult human at a dose of 5 to 30 grams. Class III materials are estimated to be fatal to an adult human at some dose in excess of 30 grams. Furthermore, the EPA classifies pesticides into those anybody can apply (General Use Pesticides), and those that must be applied by or under the supervision of a certified individual. Application of Restricted use pesticides requires that a record of the application be kept. There are three toxicity classes in the European Union's classification system, which is regulated by Directive 67/548/EEC: Very toxic and toxic substances are marked by the European toxicity symbol. The World Health Organization names four toxicity classes: The system is based on LD50 determination in rats, thus an oral solid agent with an LD50 at 5mg or less/kg bodyweight is Class I-a, at 5-50 mg/kg Class I-b, at 50-500 mg/kg Class II, and at more than 500 mg/kg Class III. Values may differ for liquid oral agents and dermal agents. 
