 Trans sodium crocetinate (TSC) is a synthetic drug that increases the movement of oxygen from red blood cells into hypoxic (oxygen-starved) tissues. TSC belongs to a group of substances known as bipolar trans carotenoid salts, which constitute a subclass of oxygen diffusion-enhancing compounds. One of the first such compounds discovered was the naturally occurring substance crocetin, the trans isomer of which forms the backbone structure of TSC. TSC was invented by American chemical engineer John L. Gainer, who reacted saffron with sodium hydroxide, and extracted the salt of the trans crocetin isomer from the solution. Gainer and colleagues subsequently investigated the effects of TSC in animal models. They discovered that the drug could reverse the potentially fatal decrease in blood pressure produced by the loss of large volumes of blood in severe hemorrhage, and thereby improve survival. Early investigations of TSC suggested that it had potential applications in battlefield medicine, specifically in treatment of the many combat casualties with hemorrhagic shock. Additional studies, carried out in animal models and in clinical trials in humans, indicated that TSC might prove beneficial in the treatment of a variety of conditions associated with hypoxia and ischemia (a lack of oxygen reaching the tissues, usually due to a disruption in the circulatory system), including cancer, myocardial infarction (heart attack), and stroke. TSC has shown promise of effectiveness in restoring tissue oxygen levels and improving the ability to walk in a clinical trial of patients with peripheral artery disease(PAD) in which reduced delivery of oxygen-rich blood to tissues can cause severe leg pain and impair mobility. The drug has also been under investigation in a clinical trial sponsored by drug developer Diffusion Pharmaceuticals for potential use as a radiosensitizer, increasing the susceptibility of hypoxic cancer cells to radiation therapy, in patients with a form of brain cancer known as glioblastoma. Similar to other oxygen diffusion-enhancing compounds, TSC appears to improve oxygenation in hypoxic tissues by exerting hydrophobic effects on water molecules in blood plasma and thereby increasing the hydrogen bonding between the water molecules. This in turn causes the overall organization of water molecules in plasma to become more structured, which facilitates the diffusion of oxygen through plasma and promotes the movement of oxygen into tissues. 
