 Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization / Transarterial Chemoembolization (TACE) is a minimally invasive medical procedure to restrict a tumor's blood supply. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer and the third most common cause of cancer-related death in the world. Due to the high prevalence of hepatitis B in Africa and Asia and hepatitic C in America and Europe, the incidence of HCC is increasing. Whilst surgery is curative, only one third of patients with HCC are suitable candidates for hepatic resection. Even in those who undergo resection, the cumulative recurrence of HCC is 70% at 5 years after surgery. Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice in a selected subset of patients, but this modality is plagued by the limited availability of donors. With regards to secondary tumors, only 25% of patients with colorectal metastases are candidates for surgery. Even in those patients who have undergone a successful margin-free resection, 60% develop recurrence. Systemic chemotherapy has been shown to have limited therapeutic effects for primary and secondary hepatic malignancies, with tumor response rates of less than 30%. Hence palliative management is the mainstay of therapy for most patients with primary and secondary liver tumors. Most investigative efforts have now converged on local control, with transarterial embolization (TAE) and transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) having an established role in therapy. TAE/TACE is used as an effective means of palliation for unresectable tumors. It has been used in the adjuvant setting to manage postoperative recurrent hepatic tumors. Trials with conflicting results have also shown TACE to be useful as an alternative to surgery for resectable tumors. The principle of TACE/TAE revolves around the basic concept of dual blood supply of the normal liver. Liver tumors derive 90% of their blood from the hepatic artery. Park et al conceptualized carcinogenesis of HCC as a multistep process involving parenchymal arterialization, sinusoidal capillarization and development of unpaired arteries (a vital component of neoangiogenesis). All these events lead to a gradual shift in blood supply from portal to arterial circulation. This radical concept has been validated using dynamic imaging modalities by various investigators. This permits a higher concentration of drug to be in contact with the tumor for a longer period of time. Sigurdson et al showed that when an agent was infused via the hepatic artery, it attained ten times higher intratumoral concentration as compared to when it was given through the portal vein. Hence, arterial treatment targets the tumor while normal liver is relatively spared. Embolization induces ischemic necrosis of tumor causing a failure of the transmembrane pump, resulting in a greater absorption of agents by the tumor cells. Tissue concentration of agents within the tumor is more than 40 times that of the surrounding normal liver. TACE is an interventional radiology procedure. The procedure involves gaining percutaneous access to the hepatic artery, usually by puncturing the common femoral artery in the right groin and passing a catheter through the abdominal aorta, through the celiac trunk and common hepatic artery, into the proper hepatic artery (which supplies the liver). The interventional radiologist then performs an arteriogram to identify the branches of the hepatic artery supplying the tumor(s) and threads smaller catheters into these branches. This position is called a superselective position. This is done to maximize the amount of the chemotherapeutic dose that is directed to the tumor and minimise the amount of the chemotherapeutic agent that could damage the normal liver tissue. When a blood vessel supplying tumor has been selected, alternating aliquots of the chemotherapy dose and of embolic particles, or particles containing the chemotherapy agent, are injected through the catheter. The total chemotherapeutic dose may be given in one vessel's distribution, or it may be divided among several vessels supplying the tumor(s). TACE derives its beneficial effect by two methods. Since most tumors are supplied by the hepatic artery, arterial embolization interrupts their blood supply and postpones growth until replaced by neovascularity. Secondly, focused administration of chemotherapy allows a higher dose to the tissue while simultaneously reducing systemic exposure, which is typically the dose limiting factor. This effect is potentiated by the fact that the chemotherapeutic drug is not washed out from the tumor bed after embolization. This way the therapeutic effect is focused in the liver, diminishing the systemic side effects of the agents. As with any interventional procedure, there is a small risk of hemorrhage and/or damage to blood vessels. Pseudoaneurysm can develop due to the puncture in the femoral artery. During this procedure contrast media is utilized, to which patients may develop an allergic reaction. Also, the contrast media can cause hyperthyroidism. The procedure induces tumour necrosis in more than 50% of patients. The resulting necrotic material releases cytokines and other inflammatory chemicals into the blood stream, and patients are routinely kept in a hospital for up to several days following the procedure. This can lead to post-embolisation syndrome. This is due to hepatic artery obstruction with an acute ischemia, characterized by fever, abdominal pain and ileus. The fever reflects the tumour necrosis. It is usually self-limiting (<48hrs). Treatment is by keeping the patient nil-by-mouth for 24 hours, with continued IV hydration. Prophylactic antibiotics are not routine. A minority develop severe infectious complications such as an abscess within the necrotic tissue. This is a potentially fatal event, although percutanous drainage can be utilised in order to prevent the septicaemia and sepsis. Cholecystitis can also occur. 
