 UCL Medical School (formerly Royal Free & University College Medical School) is the medical school of University College London (UCL) and is located in London, United Kingdom. It is one of the United Hospitals. UCL has offered education in medicine since 1834 but the current school developed from mergers between UCL and the medical schools of the Middlesex Hospital (founded in 1746) and The Royal Free Hospital (founded as the London School of Medicine for Women in 1874). Clinical medicine is primarily taught at University College Hospital, The Royal Free Hospital and the Whittington Hospital, with other associated teaching hospitals including the Eastman Dental Hospital, Great Ormond Street Hospital, The Heart Hospital, Moorfields Eye Hospital, the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery and the Royal National Throat, Nose and Ear Hospital. UCL Medical School formed over a number of years from the merger of a number of institutions: Middlesex Hospital and University College Hospital merged their medical schools in 1987 to form University College & Middlesex School of Medicine (UCMSM). In 1998 The Royal Free & University College Medical School (RFUCMS) was formed from the merger of the two medical schools. On 1 October 2008, it was officially renamed UCL Medical School. In appreciation of the historic beginnings of UCL Medical School, its student society has retained the name "RUMS" (Royal Free, University College and Middlesex Medical Students Society) which runs clubs and societies within UCLU. The medical school is one of the largest in the country with a yearly intake of 330 students. Undergraduate teaching is spread across three campuses based in Bloomsbury (the Cruciform, University College Hospital, the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Obstetric Hospital), at Archway (the Whittington Hospital and the former Royal Holborn Infirmary) and in Hampstead (the Royal Free Hospital). It has arguably some of the best clinical sites in the country including: Great Ormond Street Hospital, The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery (Queen's Square), Moorfields Eye Hospital, The Heart Hospital, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital and the Royal National Throat, Nose and Ear Hospital. The school is widely regarded as one of the best medical schools in the country (frequently ranked between number 1–5 in the country), it has a very distinguished faculty which includes 78 Fellows of the Academy of Medical Sciences amongst its staff. A report published in November 2005, by the Higher Education Policy Institute (HEPI) found that RFUCMS had the highest expenditure per student, an average spend of £50,103 per student, of any medical school in the country, followed by Oxford University Medical School (£42,348) and Imperial College School of Medicine (£38,223). The course in medicine at UCL leads to the award of the MB BS and BSc (Hons) degrees and takes six years to complete: 2 years of preclinical medicine, 3 years of clinical medicine, and 1 year studying for the intercalated BSc degree, which at UCL is compulsory for all students except postgraduates. UCL offers a wide variety of intercalation degrees ranging from the traditional subjects like anatomy, physiology and biochemistry, to more clinical courses such as Primary Health. Students select their BSc subject by applying through an internal process during the second year of the programme. There is also the opportunity to intercalate a PhD, either by taking an 'interruption of study' directly after the intercalated BSc, or as part of the integrated MB PhD programme. The latter has been offered by UCL medical school since 1994 and allows students to be offered the MB BS, BSc and PhD degrees in eight years rather than nine if the PhD is undertaken separately. Admission to the medical school, in common with all 32 medical schools in the UK, is extremely competitive. Prospective students must apply through the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS). Acceptable qualifications for entry include grades AAA at A-level, to include at least Chemistry and Biology, and a pass at AS-level. The International Baccalaureate (Full Diploma), although less common, is also an acceptable entry qualification. Additionally, applicants must sit an entrance exam, the BioMedical Admissions Test (BMAT). As well as being able to join all the UCL clubs and societies, medical students can also join those specifically for them. These clubs and societies are run by the Royal Free, University College and Middlesex Medical Students Society (RUMS) which is the Medsoc within UCL Union and as such is independent of the medical school. In 2011, UCLU Medical Society was established providing careers advice and peer teaching for medical students, as well as special interest events. It is the largest medical student society at UCL Union, with 500 members. Notable alumni include Donald Jeffries., Ben Goldacre, Christian Jessen, Michael J. Mosley 
