 Uner Tan syndrome, Unertan syndrome or UTS is a syndrome proposed by the Turkish evolutionary biologist Üner Tan. Persons affected by this syndrome walk with a quadrupedal locomotion and are afflicted with primitive speech and severe mental retardation. Tan postulated that this is an example of "backward evolution". The proposed syndrome was featured in the 2006 BBC2 documentary The Family That Walks On All Fours. The Ulaş family of nineteen from rural southern Turkey is the main example of the proposed syndrome. Tan described five members as walking with a quadrupedal gait using their feet and the palms of their hands. In infants, where this is a rare but a normal stage prior and sometimes following bipedal walking, such a gait is called "bear crawl". The affected family members are also severely mentally retarded and primitive in speech. Tan proposed that these are symptoms of Uner Tan syndrome. However, Nicholas Humphrey, John Skoyles, and Roger Keynes have argued that their gait is due to two rare phenomena coming together. First, instead of initially crawling as infants on their knees, they started off learning to move around with a “bear crawl” on their feet. Second, due to their congenital brain impairment, they found balancing on two legs difficult. Because of this, their motor development was channeled into turning their bear crawl into a substitute for bipedalism. Habitually and genetically UTS differs from disequilibrium syndrome (DES - Hagberg et al. (1972)), according to one publication. In January 2008, Tan reported on another family (four males and two females) located in southern Turkey. Four other unrelated cases in families are described in various degrees of UTS among tens of persons. Males are affected more than females. Some individuals are unaware of time, lack language, having severe mental retardation with no conscious experience and communicate by murky sounds. Two males are unable to stand up, while in other cases, can stand up but can not make a step when standing. Less severe cases use toe walking, which is a normal phase in child gait development. See for a review: Uner Tan syndrome: history, clinical evaluations, ganetics, and the dynamics of human qaudrupedalism. The Open Neurology Journal, 2010, 4, 78-89. 
