 Unilateral hearing loss (UHL) or single-sided deafness (SSD) is a type of hearing impairment where there is normal hearing in one ear and impaired hearing in the other ear. Patients with unilateral hearing loss have difficulty in In quiet conditions, speech discrimination is approximately the same for normal hearing and those with unilateral deafness; however, in noisy environments speech discrimination varies individually and ranges from mild to severe. Known causes include physical trauma, acoustic neuroma, measles, Labyrinthitis, microtia, meningitis, Ménière's disease, Waardenburg syndrome, mumps (Epidemic parotitis), and mastoiditis. A 1998 study of schoolchildren found that per thousand, 6-12 had some form of unilateral hearing loss and 0-5 had moderate to profound unilateral hearing loss. It was estimated that in 1998 some 391,000 school-aged children in the United States had unilateral hearing loss. Profound unilateral hearing loss is a specific type of hearing impairment when one ear has no functional hearing ability (91dB or greater hearing loss). People with profound unilateral hearing loss can only hear in monaural (mono). Profound unilateral hearing loss or single-sided deafness, SSD, makes hearing in background noise difficult. With speech and background noise presented at the same level, persons with unilateral deafness were found to hear only about 30-35% of the conversation. A person with SSD needs to make more effort when communicating with others. When a patient is able to hear from only one ear, and there are limited possibilities to compensate for the handicap, e.g., changing listening position, group discussions and dynamic listening situations become difficult. SSD also negatively affects hearing by making it more difficult for the patient to determine the direction, distance and movement of sound sources. In an evaluation using the Speech, Spatial and Qualities of Hearing Scale (SSQ) questionnaire, SSD patients actually perceived a greater handicap than subjects with a hearing loss in both ears. SSD is known to cause: Learning of the central nervous system by "plasticity" or biological maturation over time does not improve the performance of monaural listening. In addition to conventional methods for improving the performance of the impaired ear, there are also hearing aids specifically suited to unilateral hearing loss. Contralateral Routing of Signals (CROS) hearing aids are hearing aids that take sound from the ear with poorer hearing and transmit to the ear with better hearing. There are several types of CROS hearing aid: As of 2012 there has only been one small-scale study comparing CROS systems. One study of the BAHA system showed a benefit depending on the patient's transcranial attenuation. Another study showed that sound localisation was not improved, but the effect of the head shadow was reduced. School-age children with unilateral hearing loss have poorer grades and require educational assistance. They are also perceived to have behavioral issues. When wearing stereo headphones, people with unilateral hearing loss can hear only one channel, hence only half of the components of the music, e.g., bass or piano, but not both (although most modern recordings feature amplitude difference in instruments between the channels, rather than complete silence in one channel and full volume on the other, with respect to one specific instrument). The need for headsets for cellphones and VOIP communication has made monaural headphones, which often combine stereo to mono sound, readily available to solve the problem. Stereo headphones may also be connected to a sound source with a stereo-to-monaural adapter to achieve a similar effect (the two stereo channels going into one headphone). Some portable music players, such as the iPhone from Apple, have accessibility features which allow users to change the sound to mono. Mild and Unilateral Hearing Loss: Implications for Early Intervention 
