 The Campus Bio-Medico University (, UNICAMPUS) is a university located in Rome, Italy. It was founded in 1991 and is organized in 2 Faculties. These are the 2 faculties in which the university is divided into: They confer the Degree in Medicine (6 years), the Degree in Nursing (3 years), the Degree for Dieticians (3 years), the Degree in Science of alimentation (5 years) and the Degree plus Master in Biomedical Engineering (5 years). The Campus has been thought as an international centre of university education, health service and scientific research that may ensure the respect for the sick person’s dignity. The main purpose of the Institution is to provide the students with adequate scientific knowledge and enable them to contribute to the progress of technology and health care, always striving to ensure a compassionate, patient-centred environment. The establishment of a university nursing program is a response to the need to endow the nurses with high scientific knowledge and to acknowledge their skills and responsibilities. The Degree in Biomedical Engineering is closely related to the Faculty of Medicine: a modern hospital is provided with complex technological equipment for diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation whose design, use and technical assistance require the specific competence of biomedical engineers. The University is characterized by a limited number of students and a close student-teacher relationship. An intense tutorial activity ensures a constant assistance to the students who are helped throughout the university career to develop their values and abilities. The University Hospital Campus Bio-Medico is close to the didactic seat. It includes an out patients Clinic, a day-hospital unit, operating theatres, unities of intensive care, and departments for in-patients (cardiology, gastroenterology, gynaecology, heart surgery, hematology, immunology, medicine, oncology, ophthalmology, orthopaedics, otorhinolaryngology, senology, surgery (including plastic surgery), urology). The doctrinal and spiritual formation is entrusted to the Prelature of Opus Dei. 
