 The University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (UMDNJ) is the state-run health sciences institution of New Jersey, United States. It has eight distinct academic units. It forms an academic health sciences centre. It awarded 1,459 degrees in 2010-2011. On June 28th, 2012 the New Jersey state legislature passed a bill that will dissolve the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and merge most of its schools, except the UMDNJ - School of Osteopathic Medicine, with Rutgers University forming a new Rutgers School of Biomedical and Health Sciences effective July 1st, 2013. Members of the Rutgers Board of Governors estimated that the takeover of UMDNJ could "elevate Rutgers’ status to among the top 25 most elite research universities in America." The Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry was incorporated on August 6, 1954. The college enrolled its first class in 1956 at the Jersey City Medical Center. This was the forerunner of the New Jersey Medical School, the New Jersey Dental School, and the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences. In 1965, the college was acquired by the State of New Jersey and renamed the New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry (NJCMD). Meanwhile, The Rutgers Medical School opened in 1966 as a two-year basic science institution offering the master of medical science (M.M.S.) degree. The College of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (CMDNJ) was created by legislature in 1970 with the consolidation of the boards of trustees of Rutgers Medical School (now Robert Wood Johnson Medical School) and New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry (now New Jersey Medical School). In 1981, the CMDNJ was renamed to the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. It is the largest school of health sciences of its kind in the United States. It is also the leading research university in New Jersey, edging the other major research universities in the state (including Princeton University and Rutgers University) in federal research grant dollars. It does, however, have various academic partnerships with universities and other institutions in New Jersey. UMDNJ is made up of 8 schools: UMDNJ also operates The University Hospital in Newark, while Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, Hackensack University Medical Center in Hackensack and Cooper University Hospital in Camden are affiliates of UMDNJ. UMDNJ also operates a palliative care facility for people living with AIDS. UMDNJ has approximately 7,000 students in more than 100 degree and certificate programs; more than 13,000 employees, including nearly 2,500 faculty members; more than 31,000 alumni and more than 200 education and healthcare affiliates throughout New Jersey. The University is dedicated to pursuing excellence in the education of health professionals and scientists, conducting research, delivering healthcare, and serving the community. The National Science Foundation ranks UMDNJ #71 out of 630 universities and colleges in terms of R&D expenditures. UMDNJ has been involved in a series of blunders that include Medicaid over-billings. The criminal complaint filed against the institution charges that health care fraud occurred through alleged double-billing of Medicaid between May 2001 and November 2004 for physician services in outpatient clinics. A deferred prosecution agreement was filed in federal court in Newark, N.J., Dec. 29, 2005 to avoid prosecution. Herbert Jay Stern, a former U.S. Attorney and federal judge in New Jersey, was appointed as a federal monitor to oversee and enforce compliance in accordance with the deferred prosecution agreement that outlines reform and action to help resolve illegal practices and restore financial integrity and professionalism to the institution. In March 2008, UMDNJ announced that its accreditation by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education had been restored, following the termination of the Deferred Prosecution Agreement; Stern had recommended the return of full responsibility for governance of the institution to the UMDNJ Board of Trustees after implementation of a number of systemic reforms by the Board and administration. In Stratford, New Jersey, at the UMDNJ School of Osteopathic Medicine, Warren Wallace, the prior Senior Associate Dean for Academic and Student Affairs, was terminated amid accusations of unethical behavior. Accusations include inappropriate use of UMDNJ time and resources for political activities, efforts to obtain no-bid contracts for a friend or neighbor, and inappropriate actions in relation to obtaining admission to the School of Osteopathic Medicine for his daughter. UMDNJ had placed the New Jersey Senator Wayne Bryant on a "no-show" job to increase funding for the school, Bryant being the chairman of the Senate Budget and Appropriations Committee and the Legislature's Joint Budget Oversight Committee. Bryant stepped down from this position in February 2007. The case was investigated by former United States Attorney (later New Jersey governor) Christopher Christie. Bryant was found guilty of the charges on November 19, 2008, and received a four-year sentence in federal prison. R. Michael Gallagher, former dean of UMDNJ, was convicted of bribing Bryant and received an 18-month sentence. 
