 University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine is one of the graduate schools of University of South Florida's USF Health conglomerate. It is located in north Tampa, Florida and serves the greater Tampa Bay Area. Established by the Florida Legislature in 1965, the college enrolled its charter class in 1971. Tampa General Hospital is the primary teaching affiliate for University of South Florida College of Medicine and the rest of USF Health. In 2012, the hospital was ranked in the Top 50 of the Best Hospitals in the United States, and the top hospital in Florida by U.S. News & World Report for numerous Adult Specialties: H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute is the primary Cancer affiliate for the school. In 2007, the hospital was ranked in the Top 50 of the Best Hospitals in the United States by U.S. News & World Report for numerous Adult Specialties: The school is also affiliated with two VA Hospitals: All Children's Hospital located in St. Petersburg, Florida is the school's Pediatrics Teaching Affiliate: The College faculty runs interdisciplinary research programs on brain disease and repair, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Stroke; aging studies; Cardiovascular disease; children's health; Patient safety; Cell therapy; and Infectious disease & Biodefense. The USF campus is home to two major research facilities. H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, a four-story, building, was dedicated in October 1995. In 2003, Moffitt opened its doors to the new Moffitt Clinic and Vincent A. Stabile Research Building, dramatically increasing USF Health's research and outpatient clinical space. Additionally, there is another research building adjacent to the University of South Florida College of Medicine which provides of laboratory, research, classroom, and office space. The USF Children's Research Institute, opened in 2000, is a $12 million research building in partnership with All Children's Hospital in St. Petersburg, Florida. Center for Advanced Medical Learning and Simulation (CAMLS) "Located in downtown Tampa, CAMLS is a 90,000 square foot, state-of-the-art, three-story facility with every possible form of health professional education and training, for individuals and teams, under one roof. CAMLS integrates simulation technology, aviation science, team training, and evidence-based best practice into innovative programs with measurable outcomes. CAMLS combines cutting-edge simulation with research and innovation to move the latest advances in healthcare into practice. CAMLS programs carry the mark of excellence. CAMLS is accredited by the American College of Surgeons as a Comprehensive Accredited Education Institute and by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare. CAMLS is the first designated American College of Cardiology Center of Excellence in Education and Training and a member of the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology Simulation Consortium." USF Physicians Group made 273,122 inpatient and 276,122 outpatient visits in 1999–2000. Due to the demands from the growing patient population in Tampa Bay Area, USF Health is investing $105 million to develop a health care system using state of the art technology to improve health care management. The latest technology also serves a dual purpose as it facilitates professional health education with USF Health students employing team-based learning. At the forefront of USF Health's Advanced Health are The Carol and Frank Morsani Center and South Tampa Center. The Carol and Frank Morsani Center for Advanced Health Care is located at the corner of Holly Avenue and Magnolia Avenue in north Tampa, Florida adjacent to the USF Health Campus. It is a six-story structure designed by architect Alberto Alfonso with . Its features include entirely digital Diagnostic Imaging Center including women's diagnostics with mammography, Ambulatory Center with eight operating rooms and five endoscopy suites, Outpatient Facilities with 60 clinical exam rooms, Clinical and translational research, Patient Outreach and Education Center as well as a Pharmacy. The building will have distinct clinical spaces for Brain Health (including Neurosurgery), Neurology and Psychiatry, Gastroenterology, Otorhinolaryngology, Sports Medicine, and Women's Health. The Morsani Center's most distinct feature is called the One Stop Healthcare which aims to bring services including x-rays, MRIs, and labs to the patient. As a result the patient is spared from scheduling multiple appointments at multiple locations for their annual exam. All of the patient's needs are taken care of during one visit. Furthermore, the center also stores all the health records electronically which ensures that the patient will be able to request appointments, send email messages to doctors, and request prescriptions online. The South Tampa Center is located at the Tampa General Hospital campus on Davis Island in south Tampa, Florida. The South Tampa Center is the smaller of the two centers as it is a seven-story structure with . Its features, similar to the Morsani Center, include entirely digital Diagnostic Imaging Center including women's diagnostics with mammography, Outpatient Facilities with 90 clinical exam rooms, Clinical and translational research, as well as a Patient Outreach and Education Center. The building will have distinct clinical spaces for Pediatrics, Brain Health (including Neurosurgery), Neurology and Psychiatry, Cardiology, Dermatology, General Surgery, Vascular Surgery, Gastroenterology, Internal Medicine, and OB-GYN. The Advanced Healthcare at USF Health is also making an effort towards Holistic Health. The educational focus of the two centers are to teach students at USF Health to focus on the patient's overall well-being. Since USF Health is a conglomerate of College of Medicine, College of Nursing, College of Pharmacy, and College of Public Health, the two centers will focus on the entire continuum of health from birth to end-of-life issues. Founded in 1971, the Hinks & Elaine Shimberg Health Science Library serves the University of South Florida College of Medicine, the University of South Florida College of Nursing, and the University of South Florida College of Public Health. 
