 UpToDate is a company under the Wolters Kluwer Health division of Wolters Kluwer. Its main product is a software system that physicians around the world can access (for a fee) for assistance in making clinical decisions. UpToDate is marketed as an evidence-based clinical resource, and claims to have been written by over 5,100 physician authors, editors and peer reviewers in an editorial process that synthesizes the most recent medical information into verifiable, evidence-based recommendations. It is available both via the Internet and offline on personal computers or mobile devices. This same or similar information is available from resources commonly available to practicing clinicians without the user fee associated with this specific information bank. UpToDate also includes a drug database and a list of medical calculators. More than 30 research surveys worldwide have shown that use of UpToDate may improve patient care and quality. It also has information for patients for free. The company was launched in 1992 by Dr. Burton D. Rose along with Dr. Joseph Rush out of Dr. Rose's home. They started with nephrology and have since added twenty other specialties, with more in development. Specialties - *These specialties are in development Included are: Subscriptions are available for individual clinicians, trainees, or patients and also for enterprise-level operations. Prices vary with type and length of subscription. Physicians can earn Continuing Medical Education credits while accessing UpToDate. CME/CE/CPD Accreditations United States of America UpToDate is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education to provide continuing medical education for physicians. American Medical Association UpToDate designates this Internet point-of-care activity for a maximum of 0.5 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(s)™. Physicians should claim only credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity. There is no limit to the number of Internet Point of Care cycles that physicians may complete using UpToDate. American Academy of Family Physicians This Point-of-Care activity, UpToDate, has been reviewed and is acceptable for up to 20.00 Prescribed credit(s) by the American Academy of Family Physicians. AAFP certification begins October 31, 2012. Term of approval is for one year from this date. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity. You may earn 20 Prescribed credits per year using UpToDate. Credit earned over that amount may be used toward AAFP Elective credit. American Academy of Nurse Practitioners UpToDate is approved as a provider of nurse practitioner continuing education by the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners: AANP Provider Number: 051212. For each hour of participation with the program, NPs can claim 1.0 contact hour. UpToDate automatically tracks the time you spend using the service. American Academy of Pediatrics This continuing medical education activity has been reviewed by the American Academy of Pediatrics and is acceptable for a maximum of 50.00 AAP credits. These credits can be applied toward the AAP CME/CPD Award available to Fellows and Candidate Members of the American Academy of Pediatrics. American Academy of Physician Assistants AAPA accepts certificates of participation for educational activities certified for Category I credit from AOACCME, Prescribed credit from AAFP, and AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(s)™ from organizations accredited by ACCME or a recognized state medical society. Physician assistants may receive a maximum of 0.5 hours of Category I credit for completing each Internet Point of Care learning cycle. American College of Emergency Physicians Approved by the American College of Emergency Physicians for a maximum of 30 hour(s) of ACEP Category I credit. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has assigned up to 0.50 cognate credit per Internet Point of Care learning cycle. There is no limit to the number of Internet Point of Care learning cycles that physicians may complete using UpToDate. American Osteopathic Association UpToDate has been approved by the American Osteopathic Association for unlimited AOA Category 2-B credit. Australia/New Zealand Royal Australian College of General Practitioners Time spent reading UpToDate may be claimed on the basis of 2 points per hour in the Self Recorded Activities category of the RACGP QI&CPD Program. Royal Australasian College of Physicians RACP Fellows who read UpToDate are eligible to claim 1 credit per hour toward Category 6 requirements of the RACP MyCPD Program. Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Time spent reading UpToDate may be claimed on the basis of 1 point per hour in the Self-Education category of the RANZCOG CPD Program. Austria Austrian Academy of Physicians The Austrian Academy of Physicians of the Austrian Medical Chamber recognizes programs accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME). Physicians may submit their credits earned from UpToDate toward their DFP e-learning requirements. One credit earned from UpToDate is equal to 1 DFP point. Canada College of Family Physicians of Canada This program meets the accreditation criteria of the College of Family Physicians of Canada and has been accredited for up to 0.5 CFPC Mainpro®-M1 Credits per Internet Point of Care learning cycle. You may earn up to 15 CFPC Mainpro®-M1 Credits per year for this category of electronic CME/CPD activity. Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada Use of UpToDate may be recorded on the basis of .5 credits per activity in Section 2 (Scanning) of the Royal College Maintenance of Certification (MOC) Program. Ireland Certificates from the ACCME-accredited activity UpToDate are recognized by the Postgraduate Medical Training Bodies in Ireland and can be recorded as External CPD. Each learning cycle accumulates 0.5 credits. Mexico Colegio Mexicano de Especialistas en Ginecología y Obstetricia, A.C. (COMEGO) The Colegio Mexicano de Especialistas en Ginecología y Obstetricia recognizes UpToDate as a provider of continuing medical education on the premise that consults to UpToDate content provide clinicians needed updates and knowledge for optimum clinical practice. For time spent consulting UpToDate, you will accrue up to 10 minutes per topic per visit. You may request a certificate from UpToDate which may in turn be submitted to Consejo Mexicano de Ginecología y Obstetricia, A.C. for recertification purposes at the point value set by their current statutes. Singapore Singapore Medical Council The Singapore Medical Council recognizes UpToDate as a Category 3B distance learning program provider. Doctors may submit CME credit claims for their participation together with the certificate of participation from UpToDate toward Renewal of Practising Certificates. 
