 Vitamin K deficiency is a form of avitaminosis resulting from insufficient vitamin K1 or vitamin K2 or both. Vitamin K1-deficiency may occur by disturbed intestinal uptake (such as would occur in a bile duct obstruction), by therapeutic or accidental intake of a vitamin K1-antagonist such as coumadin, or, very rarely, by nutritional vitamin K1 deficiency. As a result, Gla-residues are inadequately formed and the Gla-proteins are insufficiently active. Symptoms include ecchymosis, petechiae, hematomas, oozing of blood at surgical or puncture sites, stomach pains; risk of massive uncontrolled bleeding; cartilage calcification; and severe malformation of developing bone or deposition of insoluble calcium salts in the walls of arteries. In infants, it can cause some birth defects such as underdeveloped face, nose, bones, and fingers. According to a study published in the October 14, 2008 edition of PLoS Medicine, Vitamin K1 (5 mg of K1/day) does not protect against age-related decreasing bone density, but may protect against fractures and cancers, in postmenopausal women taking calcium and vitamin D supplements. Menaquinone (vitamin K2), but not phylloquinone (vitamin K1), intake is associated with reduced risk of CHD mortality, all-cause mortality and severe aortic calcification. The prevalence of vitamin K deficiency varies by geographic region. For infants in the United States, vitamin K1 deficiency without bleeding may occur in as many as 50% of infants younger than 5 days old. Therefore, the Committee on Nutrition of the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that 0.5 to 1.0 mg Vitamin K1 be administered to all newborns shortly after birth. Postmenopausal and elderly women in Thailand have high risk of Vitamin K2 deficiency, compared with the normal value of young, reproductive females. Current dosage recommendations for Vitamin K may be too low. The deposition of calcium in soft tissues, including arterial walls, is quite common, especially in those suffering from atherosclerosis, suggesting that Vitamin K deficiency is more common than previously thought. 
