 Vulvodynia is a chronic pain syndrome that affects the vulvar area and often occurs without an identifiable cause or visible pathology categorized in the ICD-9 group 625—specifically ICD-9 625.7, which is for pain and other disorders of the female genital organs. It refers to pain of the vulva unexplained by vulvar or vaginal infection or skin disease. The term "vulvodynia" simply refers to "vulvar pain", and does not imply a specific cause. Pain is the most notable symptom of vulvodynia, and can be characterized as a burning, stinging, irritation or sharp pain that occurs in the vulva, including the labia and entrance to the vagina. It may be constant, intermittent or happen only when the vulva is touched, but vulvodynia is usually defined as lasting for years. Symptoms may occur in one place or the entire vulvar area. It can occur during or after sexual activity, when tampons are inserted, or when prolonged pressure is applied to the vulva, such as during sitting, bike riding, or horseback riding. Some cases of vulvodynia are idiopathic where no particular cause can be determined. Main article: Vulvar vestibulitis Vulvar Vestibulitis Syndrome (VVS), vestibulodynia, or simply vulvar vestibulitis is vulvodynia localized to the vestibular region. It tends to be associated with a highly localized “burning” or “cutting” type of pain. The pain of vulvodynia may extend into the clitoris; this is referred to as clitorodynia. Vulvar Vestibulitis Syndrome (VVS) is the most common subtype of vulvodynia that affects premenopausal women – the syndrome has been cited as affecting about 10%–15% of women seeking gynecological care. A wide variety of possible causes and treatments for vulvodynia are currently being explored. Moreover, there are probably several causes of vulvodynia, and some may be individual to the patient. Possible causes include: genetic predisposition to inflammation, allergy or other sensitivity (for example: oxalates in the urine), an autoimmune disorder similar to lupus erythematosus or to eczema or to lichen sclerosus, infection (e.g., yeast infections, bacterial vaginosis, HPV), injury, and neuropathy—including an increased number of nerve endings in the vaginal area. Some cases seem to be negative outcomes of genital surgery, such as a Labioplasty. Pelvic floor dysfunction may be the underlying cause of some women's pain. The condition is one of exclusion and other vulvovaginal problems should be ruled out. The diagnosis is based on the typical complaints of the patient, essentially normal physical findings, and the absence of identifiable causes per the differential diagnosis. A cotton “swab test” is used to delineate the areas of pain and categorize their severity. Patients often will describe the touch of a cotton ball as extremely painful, like the scraping of a knife. Many sufferers will see several doctors before a correct diagnosis is made. Many gynecologists are not familiar with this family of conditions, but awareness has spread with time. Sufferers are also often hesitant to seek treatment for chronic vulvar pain, especially since many women begin experiencing symptoms around the same time they become sexually active. Moreover, the absence of any visible symptoms means that before being successfully diagnosed many patients are told that the pain is "in their head". There is no uniform treatment approach for vulvodynia or vulvar vestibulitis. Women have shown improved symptoms from a variety of treatments. Some find 100% relief from particular treatments, while others may experience only temporary or partial relief. Responses to the various and many treatments being tried are highly variable, with many patients often trying several treatments over the course of their diagnosis depending upon their levels of relief, the preferred method(s) of their doctor(s), and the affordability of these treatments; many treatments are still experimental and often not covered by health insurance — or the particular doctor using them does not take insurance. Treatments include: Like many other people suffering from pain disorders, those afflicted with vulvodynia may often be impacted by the frustration of finding a diagnosis, subsequently confronted with an area of medicine that is still in relative infancy. The cause is still unknown and treatment success varies. Therefore, many become frustrated and sometimes depressed with a lower quality of life. In Season 4, Episode 2 "The Real Me" of Sex and the City, Charlotte is diagnosed with vulvodynia and prescribed antidepressants. This episode was received with much criticism, notably from the National Vulvodynia Association, which objected to the portrayal of the condition as a fleeting, minor condition. Season 1, Episode 3 ("In Which Addison Finds the Magic") of Private Practice includes a couple seeking treatment for vulvar vestibulitis and vaginismus. Susanna Kaysen, well known for her novel, Girl, Interrupted, and its film adaptation, has also published The Camera My Mother Gave Me, a novel concerning her own experience with vulvodynia and its debilitating symptoms. Vulvodynia was featured in the TLC documentary television series Strange Sex episode "Pleasure and Pain". Vulvodynia (and female sexual dysfunction) was featured in the season 9 True Life episode "I Can't Have Sex." http://www.jpowerpoint.com/Vulvodynia--PPT.html 
