 Wesley J. Smith (born 1949) is a lawyer and author, a Senior Fellow at the Discovery Institute's Center on Human Exceptionalism. He is also a lawyer and consultant for the International Task Force on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide, and a special consultant for the Center for Bioethics and Culture. In 2004 he was named by the National Journal as one of the nation’s top expert thinkers in bioengineering for his work in bioethics. He is a critic of scientocracy, "the trend to let 'the scientists' decide what is ethical and what our public policies should be". Smith has authored or co-authored twelve books. He formerly collaborated with consumer advocate Ralph Nader, and has been published in regional and national outlets such as The New York Times, Newsweek, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, the San Francisco Chronicle, The Seattle Times, the New York Post, and others. He is also well known for his blog, "Secondhand Smoke", hosted by First Things, and which advances his theory of "human exceptionalism" and criticizes individuals whom he has termed "mainstream" bioethicists such as Peter Singer, Julian Savulescu, Jacob M. Appel, and R. Alta Charo. He has also been highly critical of science writer Matt Ridley. Smith practiced law in the San Fernando Valley from 1976–1985, at which time he left law practice to pursue other interests, particularly as a public policy advocate. His first book in 1987 was The Lawyer Book: A Nuts and Bolts Guide to Client Survival, introduced by consumer advocate Ralph Nader beginning a collaboration between the two men. Smith is a prolific author and a frequent contributor to National Review and The Weekly Standard. He closely followed the Terri Schiavo case in 2005, and wrote frequently on the topic. He opposes assisted suicide and euthanasia. He is also a noted critic of mainstream views in bioethics, human cloning research, radical environmentalism, which he worries exhibits "anti-humanism,", and of what he calls the radical animal liberation movement. His book Culture of Death: The Assault on Medical Ethics in America was named Best Health Book of the Year at the 2001 Independent Publishers Book Awards. Smith is a frequent guest on radio and television talk shows, having appeared on national programs such as Good Morning America and Nightline, as well as internationally on BBC 4. He has testified as an expert witness in front of federal and state legislative committees, and is an international public speaker. He contributes a weekly podcast called What It Means to be Human, which is produced by the Discovery Institute. His work as a senior fellow at the Discovery Institute is with the Project on Human Rights and Bioethics. Smith is married to the syndicated San Francisco Chronicle columnist, Debra Saunders. In a 2001 essay, physician Matthew K. Wynia and attorney Arthur Derse accused Smith of selectively using evidence to create a false impression that bioethics is a monolithic field. They argued that Smith was "prepared to bend the truth to make a point, turn a stomach, and potentially radicalize a reader." Smith rebutted these criticisms, stating in part, "Wynia and Derse assert that I claim bioethics is a monolith. That is not what I write. What I do believe is that bioethics has, generally, crystallized into an orthodoxy, perhaps even an ideology. I acknowledge that disagreements certainly exist within the field. But I view them, with some exceptions, as the arguing of people who agree on fundamentals but disagree on details -- sort of like Catholics bickering with Baptists." 
