 William A. Haseltine (born October 17, 1944) is an American biologist, entrepreneur and philanthropist. He is known for his groundbreaking work on HIV/AIDS and the human genome. Haseltine was a Professor at Harvard Medical School where he founded two research departments on cancer and HIV/AIDS. Haseltine is a Founder of several biotechnology companies including Cambridge Biosciences, The Virus Research Institute, ProScript, LeokoSite, Dendreon, and Diversa. He was a founder Chairman and CEO of Human Genome Sciences, a company that pioneered the application of genomics to drug discovery. He is the President of the Haseltine Foundation for Science and the Arts and is the Founder, Chairman and CEO of ACCESS Health International a not-for-profit organization dedicated to improving access to high quality health worldwide. He was listed by Time Magazine as one of the world's 25 most influential business people in 2001. William Alan Haseltine Work Personal William Haseltine has devoted his career to improvements in human health. Early on, as a consequence of observing his mother's suffering from multiple health issues, he decided to devote his professional life to improvements human health. He was born to a scientific family. His grandfather was an engineer, his father a Ph.D physicist. He was raised on a Naval Base, the Naval Ordinance Test Station at China Lake in the Mohave Desert of California surrounded by weapons scientists and engineers. His older sister Florence received both a PhD in Biophysics and an MD, and his younger brother Eric Haseltine a PhD in Neurobiology. His younger sister Susan became a specialist in computer systems. His early life is described in the book Rapture by Brian Alexander (1d) and Gene Masters by Ingrid Winkelgren (3d). Haseltine graduated from Burroughs High School in 1962. He received a BA in Chemistry from UC Berkeley in 1966 and a PhD in Biophysics from Harvard University in 1973. Haseltine was pre-medical student at the University of California majoring in chemistry. George C Pimentel, a charismatic and world-renowned chemist and educator, directed his interests toward science. Working under Pimentel's direction he published two scientific papers as an undergraduate, one on the composition of the Martian atmosphere in Science Magazine. and a second on the use of isotope shifted lasers for communication to outer space in Applied Physics Letters. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa his junior year and graduated at the top of his class. Upon graduation he decided to learn as much as possible about science as possible towards creating new ways to treat and cure disease. At Harvard University he worked under the direction of James D. Watson, co-discoverer of the structure of DNA and Walter Gilbert who later received a Nobel prize for developing a method to determine the sequence of DNA. Work in this laboratory gave him an excellent grounding in the tools of what was then the new field of molecular biology. As a graduate student he worked on fundamental aspects of regulation of expression of genes, how the use of genetic information is regulated. Specifically he elucidated the means by which bacteria signal the shift from growth when food is abundant to maintenance when food is scarce, the topic of his PhD thesis titled Magic Spot and the Stringent Response. During his graduate studies William Haseltine was also active in his opposition to the war in Vietnam. He wrote several articles on the use of technology in the Vietnam War and broke the "Agent Orange Defoliation" story in a cover article in the New Republic. He worked with the American Friends to create a resource center for those who wished to understand their own communities’ involvement in the war and lectured against the war throughout the country for several years. He was a founder of "Science for the People". In 1973 William Haseltine joined the laboratory of David Baltimore at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a post-doctoral fellow. There he began to work on fundamental aspects of how a class of viruses (retroviruses) known to cause cancer in animals reproduce. His work, in collaboration with several other scientists, provided unexpected insights into the process of retrovirus replication and was recognized as innovative in publication in leading scientific journals. This work prepared him for research on human disease and retroviruses, both important later in his career. He interrupted his postdoctoral studies at MIT briefly the summer of 1973 to serve as a visiting Professor at the University of Copenhagen where he continued his work on the regulation of gene expression in bacteria. In 1976 he joined the faculty of the new comprehensive cancer center, the Dana Farber Cancer Institute affiliated with Harvard Medical School. He became a professor in the Harvard Medical School Department of Pathology and shortly thereafter a Professor in the Cancer Biology Department of the Harvard School of Public Health. He founded the equivalent of two academic departments: the Laboratory of Biochemical Pharmacology devoted to work on cancer cause and treatment, and the Division of Human Retrovirology, dedicated understanding and finding treatments for HIV/AIDS. As a professor, he published more than two hundred research articles in leading scientific journals and edited several books. He mentored dozens of graduate students and post doctoral fellows, many of whom have gone on to have successful careers of their own at Harvard and elsewhere. He taught advanced level courses in cancer biology and HIV/AIDS to graduate and medical students. For many years he taught a course "Biology and Social Issues" for Harvard non-science undergraduates and was a tutor and thesis advisor for several generations of Harvard undergraduate biochemistry students. Retrovirus replication continued to be a focus of his early research as a Harvard professor. This research lead to fundamental insights including the "end to end jumping" of the initial copy of the genome. He then began to focus on two related issues: how retroviruses induce cancer in animals, and whether or not retroviruses cause cancer and other diseases in humans. His laboratory discovered that the key determinant of the ability of retroviruses, those that do not carry oncogenes, to cause cancer is their ability to rapidly replicate in cells that themselves grow rapidly. This allows the retrovirus to implant nearby a cellular oncogene. Another impact for science of this work was the discovery that small genetic elements upstream of the transcription start site, now called enhancers, determine the rate at which genes are copied into RNA. This discovery provided a key insight into factors that distinguish one cell type from another. In 1978, responding to the needs of the physicians treating cancer, Haseltine began to focus on improving chemotherapy by deepening the understanding of how drugs and radiation used to treat cancer actually worked. Many of the anti-cancer treatments kill the rapidly growing cancer cells by damaging DNA. The Haseltine lab was among the first to apply the new techniques of DNA sequencing to the understanding of DNA damage and its repair. These studies lead to a deeper insight into the action of many anti cancer treatments and formed the basis for the creation of the Division of Biochemical Pharmacology. The discoveries made at the time informed the design of new approaches to the treatment of head and neck cancer by the President of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Emil Frei. Ultimately the team lead by Dr. Frei was successful increasing 5-year survival of patients with head and neck cancer to 80% from 20%. The Division also had the mission to train a new generation of physicians/scientists specializing in cancer pharmacology. The laboratory extended this work to study the process by which cancer causing chemicals and radiation cause the changes to DNA which can lead to cancer. The work revealed a new and unexpected form of sun induced DNA damage, called the 6-4 lesion responsible for most mutations in sun exposed skin that cause cancers including melanoma. Haseltine was one of the very few scientists in the late 1970s who continued to work on the concept that retroviruses played an important role in human diseases. This idea once popular in the late 1960s and early 1970s was abandoned by many after a decade or more of a futile search for human retroviruses by laboratories around the world. Haseltine, working with a few other scientists, thought that human retroviruses would behave differently from those that affect laboratory animals such as mice and would behave more like those that cause cancer and immunological deficiencies in non-laboratory animals. These viruses seem to disappear after early infection, the disease appearing only after several years. Haseltine devoted part of his laboratory to the study retroviruses in these animals in the hopes that they would provide insight into human disease. In 1978 he helped to design a special containment laboratory at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute to work on these viruses should they be discovered, later essential for his work on HIV/AIDS. In 1979 Robert Gallo and his laboratory at the National Institutes of Health discovered the first human retrovirus to cause a human disease, the Human T cell leukemia Virus (HTLV). HTLV is sexually transmitted from men to women, by women to their children and by blood transfusions. The disease, T-cell leukemia, arises decades after infection. Haseltine and his laboratory discovered that HTLV carried a novel gene, called the transactivator X (now called tax). Over the next few years, Haseltine and his colleagues showed that tax is the gene responsible for the cancers. 92, Haseltine spent the summer of 1983 as a visiting professor at the University of Kyoto working with Japanese scientists studying the Human T cell Leukemia virus, a virus endemic to Japan. The work HTLV prepared Haseltine for work on AIDS. Before the AIDS epidemic was identified, Haseltine already had the expertise and the facilities to study human retroviruses. He first learned of the new disease from colleagues in late 1981. In early 1982 he and a few other scientists, including Max Essex and Robert Gallo who were working on HTLV, formed a small working group to identify the cause of the new disease. They met regularly every 4–6 weeks from early 1982 to 1985. With help from James Curran of the Centers of Disease Control, who played a key role in identification of how the disease was transmitted, this group formed the hypothesis that AIDS was caused by a human retrovirus similar to HTLV. They proposed to use methods similar to those used to isolate the HTLV virus to find this new virus. These methods were successfully used both by the laboratory at NIH and a Paris laboratory to isolate the virus, now called the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and to demonstrate that it is the cause of AIDS. For the next ten years Haseltine devoted his efforts to finding ways to diagnose, treat and prevent HIV/AIDS. He was one of the first to recognize the danger the disease posed and to accurately predict the magnitude of the epidemic. His views were considered highly controversial as summarized in a book, The Myth of Heterosexual Aids: How a Tragedy Has Been Distorted by the Media and Partisan Politics by Michael Fumento. In a retrospective article titled "20 years ago in Discover: Misunderstanding AIDS", Discover Magazine credited Haseltine as the only one of 20 scientists interviewed in the mid-1980s that correctly predicted that HIV/AIDS would become a global pandemic. Haseltine's approach to the epidemic was threefold: The first goal was achieved by understanding the structure and function of the virus. Haseltine's laboratory, working with the Gallo laboratory, determined the complete sequence of the viral genome and discovered the genes that specify the virus capsid, polymerase, protease, ribonuclease H, integrase and envelop genes. The first application of this knowledge was to design a fragment of the virus envelope protein that could be used to accurately detect antibodies to HIV in those infected, forming the basis of an accurate diagnostic test. This protein fragment was used by Cambridge BioSciences (Later named Cambridge BioTech) to develop a rapid test for HIV infection that could be used at home. It was only in 2012, that the US FDA approved a similar home HIV test kit. Haseltine and his laboratory quickly showed that damage to any of the viral genes that specify the virus capsid, polymerase, protease, ribonuclease, integrase and envelope genes killed the virus and therefore that proteins specified by each gene were good targets for anti-viral drugs. Over the next several years his laboratory isolated each of the genes and their proteins in pure form and developed methods that were used by the pharmaceutical companies to discover new anti viral drugs. Haseltine proposed the use of combination chemotherapy, the use of multiple drugs targeted against different viral proteins would be the basis for effective therapy. Today those ideas have proven out; The pharmaceutical industry has developed drugs inhibit the HIV polymerase, protease, integrase, and envelope proteins. Combinations of these drugs have transformed HIV infection from a near universally fatal disease to one that with proper management can usually be successfully treated for decades. The HIV genome presented several additional mysteries. The virus genome contained regions that might specify as yet unknown proteins. The Haseltine laboratory discovered a novel transacting protein, they named the transactivator tat, and a second protein, originally named art now called rev, both required for virus replication. He predicted that drugs that target these proteins will also be effective in treating the infection. Such drugs have yet to be developed. His laboratory went on to discover additional viral proteins - vpr, vpu, vif, and nef - required for efficient virus growth in some but not all circumstances. The discoveries were summarized in an article in 1988 in Scientific American. During this period his laboratory made other scientific observations that helped to understand and control the epidemic. Working with Eric Langhoff who he recruited for this work, his laboratory showed that dendritic cells that pass back and forth through the mucous membranes of the reproductive are carriers that transport HIV into the body to begin the process of infection. Working with Ruth Ruprecht in animal models of the disease, he showed that it was possible to reduce the incidence of maternal child transmission, the first proof that this was possible. His laboratory was the first to use a weakened form a HIV to introduce foreign genes into cells, laying the foundation for what are now called "lentivirus vectors for gene therapy". The laboratory also created hybrid viruses that carry some monkey and some HIV genes-the so-called SHIV viruses-so that new drugs and vaccines could be developed using primate models. Haseltine was one of the first to publicly voice skepticism that an anti-HIV vaccine would soon be developed. At the second international HIV/AIDS meeting held in Paris in 1986 he noted that during infection the human immune response is fully activated, antiviral antibody levels are high and cell mediated immunity is fully active, yet the infection proceeds. Therefore, known vaccine technologies which induce either one or the other or both were unlikely to work. This idea, very unpopular at the time, proved to be prophetic. The conclusion was that efforts to control the disease must rely on diagnosis, treatment and education as a vaccine would not be forthcoming soon. After ten years of work, the first goal was accomplished. the scientific foundation for a rational approach to the diagnosis and treatment of HIV/AIDS was laid, the necessary tools were at hand. The success of combination anti viral drug treatments today is based on those foundations. The second goal was to help the creation of new institutions to conduct the research necessary to control the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In the early years of the epidemic there was little money or enthusiasm in the scientific community for such work. The threat of the epidemic was not apparent to most, as for example reflected in the Department of Health and Human Service recommendation to Congress in 1986 that only one million dollars be allocated to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for HIV/AIDS research. In the late summer of 1886 Rock Hudson fell in with AIDS in Paris and was airlifted to Los Angeles. Realizing that this might be a moment to begin to build support for HIV/AIDS research, Haseltine enlisted the help of Elizabeth Taylor, with whom he was working in the newly created American Foundation for AIDS Research (AMFAR), and members of the Lasker Foundation. In a six-week period this small group, with the support of Senators Ted Kennedy and Ted Stevens, were able to convince Congress to add about $320 million as a supplemental appropriation to the budget of NIH specifically for HIV/AIDS research (as recounted in the book Rapture). Haseltine was appointed to the Council of the National Institute of Allergy (NIAID) and Infectious disease to help direct how these funds were to be used. Over the next few years funding of HIV/AIDS research grew to about $2 billion per year. These funds have been instrumental in creating a powerful research institutions to control the HIV/AIDS epidemic, institutions which have trained many thousands of scientists and doctors and which continue to seek better ways to treat, cure and prevent the disease. Haseltine played an important early role in the creation of the International Society or AIDS Research and was the Founding editor of the scientific journal AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses. Haseltine then helped design programs to transfer knowledge of from academic laboratories to pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies to develop new anti viral drugs. Early on pharmaceutical companies were reluctant to initiate new research programs on HIV/AIDS. Biotechnology companies lacked the necessary funds and expertise for such work. To address this issue, Haseltine suggested that NIAID create a special grant program to encourage pharmaceutical and biotech companies to work on HIV related problems. Under this program a relatively large amount of money was granted to academic scientists provided that their laboratory have a pharmaceutical or biotechnology partner capable of translating knew knowledge to new drugs. The majority of the funds of these grants went to the industry partner to encourage the development of new drug research activities. These co-operative grants led directly to the discovery of the protease inhibitors that changed the course of HIV/AIDS treatment and later to drugs that effectively target the integrase and envelope proteins. By 1992, only ten years after the AIDS virus was first recognized, the institutions that today guide HIV/AIDS research were created and still endure. In the early days of the epidemic Haseltine recognized a two-fold problem in public perception. Many, both within and outside of the scientific/medical community, did not believe the epidemic would ever pose a serious threat to populations. Others believed that AIDS patients posed an immediate threat of infection and must avoided. To address this issue Haseltine help to create and guide several different groups. One of the most successful groups was the American Foundation of AIDS Research. Haseltine became the first chairman of the scientific advisory board of AMFAR. The mission was twofold, to make start up grants available for those wishing to begin work on HIV/AIDS. Many of today's leaders of HIV/AIDS received their first support from AmFAR. The second goal was to provide a body of scientific and medical experts willing to speak out about the danger and magnitude of the epidemic and to provide a credible reference for those worried about causal transmission- in others words a group a qualified experts to speak about the real dangers of the disease and to counter unjustified fears. AmFAR continues in this role today. Haseltine also worked internationally on these issues of public perception. He became an advisor to the AIDS Crises Trust in Great Britain, a group that worked closely with Princess Diana. Perhaps more than any other person, Princess Diana's willingness to hug adults AIDS patients and hold AIDS infants served to de-stigmatize those with the disease and to defuse fear. For a time Haseltine also worked with L.I.F.E a group founded by the designer Valentino to combat HIV prejudice. From 1986 to 1990 Haseltine appeared on many radio and television programs both in and outside the US to warn of the dangers of the epidemic and to de-stigmatize the disease. William Haseltine has also had an active career in Biotechnology. He is the founder of several companies, an advisor to venture capital groups and was the founder, chairman and CEO of a major Biotechnology Company, Human Genome Sciences. Haseltine's interest in biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies arose from his desire to convert new knowledge to new ways to treat and cure disease. In 1981 he founded Cambridge BioSciences to create a new generation animal vaccines. The first product, developed for the French company Virbac, was a vaccine to protect domestic cats from infection by the feline leukemia virus. The company developed an effective vaccine, one that used recombinant viral protein and a novel adjuvent, Stimulon, to make the vaccine more potent. It was the first vaccine to protect mammals from a retrovirus infection. In 1987 Haseltine became an advisor to a venture capital company, Healthcare Ventures lead by Wallace Steinberg. Over the next several years together they founded several biotechnology companies each working in a different area of science and medicine. In the late 1980s Haseltine was asked by several Harvard colleagues to help create their own companies. Among these was ProScript Inc. ProScript discovered Velcade, an inhibitor of the proteosome, that has proved to be an effective treatment for multiple myeloma and other cancers. Haseltine and Timothy Springer also founded LeukoSite Inc. to develop drugs to treat autoimmune diseases. LeukoSite, also initially funded by Healthcare Ventures, acquired ProScript which in turn was acquired by Millenium Pharmaceuticals, the company that successfully brought Velcade to market. Millennium was acquired by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. Today Velcade is an important drug in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Knowledge of the importance of dendritic cells in HIV infection provided the insight that lead to the formation of a company that pioneered immune cell therapy of cancer. Together with Healthcare Ventures, Haseltine formed the company Activated Cell Therapy Inc., to use dendritic cells to treat cancer. The company was eventually renamed Dendreon Corp. and successfully brought the first approved cell based immune therapy to market, Provenge, for the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer. Haseltine also was the Founder of a company now called Diversa. It was originally named Industrial Genome Sciences Inc. The company uses genomics to identify enzymes for industrial and commercial applications. In early 1992 Wally Steinberg of Healthcare Ventures invited Haseltine to be the Chairman and CEO of a new company be created by Healthcare Ventures, Human Genome Sciences Inc.. Steinberg together with another venture capital group had identified the work of an NIH scientist as the potential basis for forming a new biotechnology company. Haseltine knew from systematic application of knowledge of the HIV genome to drug discovery, how powerful they new techniques could be both for fundamental biological discovery and drug development. In fact work with the HIV genome was perhaps the first time primary knowledge of a new organism originated from studies of the genome. The history of HIV/AIDS drug development proved just how useful such information could be. It was in fact the basis for the rapid and successful development of effective anti-HIV drugs. Haseltine proposed to create a new, large pharmaceutical company that not only would pioneer the development of a powerful new set of tools for drug discovery but one that would itself apply these tools to the discovery, development manufacture and sale of its own drugs. To support this vision, which he estimated would take twenty years to effect, he suggested that the company raise money by sharing the rights to the gene discovery tools with other pharmaceutical companies. This idea became the founding vision of the company. In late 1992 Human Genome Sciences led by Haseltine was formed. In April 1993, just a few months after its founding, SmithKline Beecham invested in Human Genome Sciences to acquire access to the new tools of genomic discovery. The initial $125 million transaction was at the time the largest funding received by a fledgling biotechnology company. A year later Human Genome Sciences and SmithKline Beecham split another $320 million raised by selling access to the Human Genome Sciences discovery tools to several other pharmaceutical companies, including the Japanese company Takeda, the German company Merck, the US company Schering Plough and the French Company Sanofi. At the time, the idea that newly isolated human genes of unknown function could prove useful for drug development was widely criticized. Haseltine's experience with HIV taught him that knowledge of the genome without prior knowledge of function was useful and had led to the discovery of new and useful drug targets and new and effective drugs. Haseltine argued that if one new human gene were discovered, the techniques of modern modern biology would allow its natural function and potential medical use to be determined. If that were true for one gene, then why not all the human genes? New tools had been developed that allowed what had been tedious hard work of gene isolation and characterization to be replaced by highly automated instruments and the data regarding the structure, tissue and cell location and the results of functional tests to be stored and easily accessed using advanced computer technologies. He summarized these views with the statement "Genomics is not necessarily Genetics". It was not until the Human Genome Science approach was validated by its own work and the work of its partners that it was ultimately adopted by the scientific community. Today, the approach pioneered by Human Genome Sciences is one of the principal tools used today for the discovery and characterization of novel human genes and as well as the genes of other species. The gene discovery efforts of Human Genome Sciences were successful. By the fall of 1994 the Institute of Genomic Research working with Human Genome Sciences had isolated and characterized by partial sequence analysis more than 90% of all human genes. Preliminary information regarding the tissue and cell in which they were expressed as messenger RNA was available and data regarding their expression in normal and disease tissues. The work of drug discovery then began. Over the next several years Human Genome Sciences initiated clinical trials of several new drugs discovered using genomic methods. These included a new skin growth factor Keratinocyte growth factor 2 for the treatment of diabetic ulcers and cancer therapy induced mucositis, vascular endothelial growth factor for the treatment of peripheral limb ischemia, radio-iodinated B Lymphocyte Stimulator (BLyS) for the treatment of multiple myeloma, a monoclonal antibody that to treat cancer that recognizes the Trail receptor, and a monoclonal antibody that antagonizes BLyS (benlimumab, trade name Benlysta). Benlysta was approved for the treatment of lupus by the US FDA in 2010. The approval of Benlysta fulfilled the hopes that the new genomic method of drug discovery would lead to the treatment of disease that had resisted prior attempts at treatment. Additionally Human Genome Sciences developed a monoclonal antibody, Abthrax, for the treatment and prevention of Anthrax infections. Abthrax was approved by the FDA and is currently stockpiled by the US government. Haseltine directed research on an antidote to anthrax immediately following the anthrax attack 2001 anthrax attacks of 2001. In July 2012 Human Genome Sciences was bought by Glaxo SmithKline for $3.6 billion. In addition to Benlysta and Abthrax, the purchase gave Glaxo SmithKline exclusive rights to both Albiglutide for the treatment of diabetes, and Darapladib for the treatment of coronary artery disease both in late stage clinical trials. William Haseltine coined the term regenerative medicine at a conference on Lake Como, Italy in1999 in an attempt to help explain to the public the benefits of new biomedical research (). He explained that several new technologies, gene,therapy, stem cell therapy, tissue engineering and biomechanical prosthetics all had the same goal, to restore to normal functions organs, tissues and cells injured by trauma, damaged by disease or worn by time. He was a co-founder of E-Biomed the Journal of Regenerative medicine and of The Society for Regenerative Medicine. Haseltine authored several articles that laid out the fundamental structure of this new discipline. William Haseltine has also served as a consultant to several governments. He was a member of the AIDS Executive Committee of the National Institutes of Health from 1986-1992 and served on the Council of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious diseases from 1987 to 1991. It was during this time that he played a central role in crafting the US response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. He was also an advisor to the President's Emergency Plan For AIDS Relief. From 1986-1990 he served as an informal advisor to President François Mitterrand of France on HIV/AIDs working primarily with his chief of staff Jacques Attali. He has advised the governments of France, Germany, Italy, Hungary, India Singapore and India on biotechnology and economic development. Haseltine left Human Genome Sciences on his 60th birthday in October 2004 to take up a career in philanthropy and to help reshape the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry. Since then he has founded two charitable Foundations: The Foundation for Science and the Arts and ACCESS Health International, both 5013C corporations. The Foundation for Medical Sciences and the Arts supports both biomedical research and the arts including the visual arts, music, opera and dance. A special focus of the Foundation is the creation of works of art and music that interpret discoveries of biology and medicine. Haseltine is a Founder, Chairman and President of ACCESS Health International (www.accessh.org) an operating foundation devoted to improving access to high quality health worldwide, both in low and high income countries alike. The encompasses research, knowledge transfer, implementation support, and health technologies. ACCESS Health has offices in the United States, India, Singapore, the Philippines, Bangladesh and Sweden. He is the author of a book "Affordable Excellence: The Singapore Health care Story: How to Create and Manage Sustainable Healthcare Systems"(74b) to be published in the Winter of 2012-2013 and of co-author of "Improving the Health of Mother and Child: Solutions from India" available as an e-book on the ACCESS Health International website. Haseltine is an active supporter of several other not for profit organizations. He is a member of the Advisory Board of the IE University, Madrid, the Advisory Council for the Koch Institute of MIT, a member of the Advisory Board of the Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard and MIT, and is a Lifetime Governor of the New York Academy of Science. He is an honorary member of the Board of Trustees of the Brookings Institution, a member of the Board of Trustees of the Center for Emerging Markets of the Indian School of Business, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, a member of the Board of AID for AIDS International. He is a Member of the Advisory Board of the Metropolitan Opera of New York, a member of the Chairman's Council of the Metropolitan Museum of New York, a member of the International Council of the Guggenheim Museum, a member of the board of Directors of the Young Concert Artists and the Youth Orchestra of the Americas. 
