 World Cancer Research Fund International (WCRF International) is a not-for-profit association, established by royal decree in Belgium, with headquarters in London, UK. As of 2011 Marilyn Gentry was President of WCRF International. With strategically placed member organizations, WCRF funds innovative scientific research to raise awareness that cancer is largely preventable and provides health information on cancer prevention and control. It focuses on scientific research into the links between cancer and diet, physical activity and body fat. WCRF International provides support and operational services to its member organisations, which are based in the US (American Institute for Cancer Research); UK (World Cancer Research Fund UK); Netherlands (Wereld Kanker Onderzoek Fonds); and Hong Kong (World Cancer Research Fund Hong Kong). WCRF International together with its member organisations are known as the WCRF global network. First Expert Report: In 1997, the WCRF global network published Food, Nutrition and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global Perspective. This expert report examined all the available evidence on the links between cancer and diet. According to WCRF International’s website, the report was a “catalyst for change”. Second Expert Report: In November 2007, the WCRF global network published Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global Perspective,. In the initial review half a million studies were identified, which were screened down to 22,000. Eventually, 7,000 were deemed relevant and met the quality criteria for definitive conclusions to be drawn. A panel of 21 experts then made 10 recommendations for cancer prevention. Policy Report: In February 2009, the WCRF global network published Policy and Action for Cancer Prevention, a companion document to the Second Expert Report. It included 48 recommendations for changes that different groups in society can make to help prevent cancer. It also included a preventability study that estimated that a third of the most common cancers in the UK could be prevented through diet, physical activity and weight management. Research: WCRF International manages and administers the International Research Grant Programme on behalf of its member organisations in the UK, the Netherlands and Hong Kong. The American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR) also has its own grant programme. WCRF International and AICR manage the Continuous Update Project, the largest central resource for scientific evidence on diet, physical activity, body weight and cancer. 
