 Yoram Chaiter is a physician, cancer researcher, researcher in the fields of epidemiology,public health and quality in healthcare and bass singer. He was born in Berehove, Zakarpattia Oblast, Ukrainian SSR, USSR in 1964 and immigrated to Israel in 1973. He studied at the Faculty of Medicine, [Technion, Haifa] from 1982 to 1989. He received degree of B.Sc. of Medical Sciences cum laude in 1986 and received degree of Doctor of Medicine cum laude in 1990. He spent a year of Internship at Poriya hospital and Rambam Medical Center for 1989–1990 and in 2004 received degree of Master of Medical Sciences, Technion, Haifa. Hi M.Sc thesis theme was Nutritional Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer- Carotenoids and his M.D. thesis theme was Epidemiology of Myeloproliferative Disorders in North Israel. He was Head Physician of Recruitment Center from 1990. He was Head of Medical Quality Control of Recruitment Centers at IDF from 1997. He performed nutritional epidemiology/carotenoid isomers research as part of MECC (Molecular Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer) research, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Carmel Medical Center,Haifa. His research established the first carotenoid isomer database in food items and was the first to examine associations between dietary carotenoids intake and colorectal cancer risk. His medical activity focuses on quality assurance of medical procedures, instruction of fellow physicians in providing high quality medical services, establishing and training for the technical and administrative medical personnel, screening procedures among adolescents, epidemiology of medical conditions among the young population, epidemiological research of populations, and nutritional and cancer epidemiology. Yoram Chaiter, Yossy Machluf,Avinoam Pirogovsky,Elio Palma, Avi Yona, Tamar Shohat, Yael Frenkel, Orna Tal, Nachman Ash Medical committees at IDF- anagement and quality control and assurance by computerized systems- poster presentation at the 16th Annual Congress of the Israeli association of Medical Quality assurance and control, Tel Aviv. November .2009. Yoram Chaiter, Yossy Machluf,Avinoam Pirogovsky, Orna Tal,Nachman Ash-Medical conditions in adolescents–from epidemiologic trends to a nationwide health project for disease risk reduction-Oral presentation at The 12th Biennial Conference of the European Association for Research on Adolescence, Vilnius, Lithuania, May, 2010 Began musical studies by studying the piano. Studied voice with Ms Tamar Raz and also with Ms. Leane Dubin. Has been working and recording now for many years with coach and pianist Ina Weizmann and pianist Ira Zelikson. Participated in the Metropolitan Workshop with the Israeli Opera where he performed the role of Cardinal de Brogni in the opera La Juive by Halevy. During his studies of medicine at the Technion began his long association with the Technion orchestra and choir. Performs constantly with the Technion Symphony Orchestra and Choir as a soloist, among the roles he performed are Colline in La Bohème by Puccini, excerpts from Boris Godunov by Mussorgsky and Escamillo in Carmen. Appeared in Macbeth by Bloch during the Bloch Festival held at the Technion. A mong other operatic roles was Commendatore in Mozart's Don Giovanni with Haifa symphony orchestra under the baton of Noam Sheriff and Tamir Chasson. His long collaboration with conductor Leonti Wolf and the Tel Aviv philharmonic choir resulted in performances of Verdi's Requiem and Mozart's Requiem and the role of Dr. Dulcamara in L'Elisir d'Amore with Israeli chamber orchestra. In December 2008 sang with same conductor and choir the premiere of Irit Israelis' Cantata to 60 years of Israel independence at the TelAviv museum Rekanati hall. Concert repertoire also includes Stabat Mater by Rossini, Creation by Haydn, Messa di Gloria by Puccini, Beethoven's 9th Symphony, Verdi's Requiem, Vesperae solennes de confessore, Great Mass and Requiem by Mozart and Requiem by Faure. Repertoire also includes songs by Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninov, Mussorgsky, Brahms, Schubert, Wolf, Erwin Junger, Dvořák and others. Premiered David's song cycle by Israeli composer Erwin Junger in 1993. Made two recordings for the Israeli Radio (Kol Hamusica) in 1991 and 1996. Appeared in a recital at Kfar Bloom during the festival of Kol Hamusica in 2007. In 2004 recorded two song cycles by Erwin Junger,and in 2005 made a recording of songs by Erwin Junger on verses of Hungarian poets. These recordings were broadcast by the Israeli radio during 2006-7.The recordings including songs of other composers was released recently on Eroica records.Erwin Junger is an Israeli Transylvanian composer, that has written numerous symphonies,chamber music, choral and operatic works and songs.Yoram Chaiters' recording of the songs is premiere recordings of these works. In 2007 recorded Dvořák's Biblical songs and Gypsy songs in Czech and a selection of Tchaikovsky songs.The recording was released in July 2008 by [Roméo Records] in the US and Europe. A new recording of fourteen Rachmaninov songs,a selection of Brahms songs and a selection of Schubert songs was released on Roméo records. A CD of Tosti, Respighi and Napolitan songs is was recorded in 2010 and is to be released on Romeo records. In January 2010 appeared on the program Intermezzo hosted by Prof. Arie Vardi. The program was broadcasted on Channel 1 of Israeli Broadcasting Authority and Israeli Educational TV numerous times during 2010-11. Radio broadcasts:Numerous radio broadcasts of all recordings on Kol Hamusica, Israeli Broadcasting Authority. Songs by Rachmaninov, Brahms. Schubert- Roméo Records 7277, 2009 
