 Youth suicide is when a young person: generally categorized as someone below age 24, deliberately ends their own life. Rates of attempted and completed youth suicide in Western societies and other countries are high For example, in Australia suicide is second only to motor vehicle accidents as the leading cause of death for people aged 15–24, and according to the National Institute for Mental Health, suicide is the third leading cause of death among teens in the United States. In India, one-third of suicides are young people 15–29. In 2002, 154,000 suicides were recorded in India. According to research carried out by the Commission for Children and Young People and Child Guardian in 2007, 39% of all youth suicides are completed by young people who have lost someone of influence or significance to them to suicide. The Commission terms this suicide contagion and makes several recommendations as to the importance of safe guarding young people and communities from suicide contagion. In 2011 the Australian Federal Parliament Standing Committee for Health and Ageing Inquiry into Youth Suicide met in a round table forum with young representatives from three organisations at the forefront of preventing youth suicide, including Sunnykids, Inspire, and Boys Town. The Standing Committee has since released a discussion paper highlighting the findings of their inquiry and will seek to make final recommendations on the most effective means for reducing youth suicide at the conclusion of their inquiry. One of the problems is getting psychiatric counseling when it's needed. "In teenagers, depression is considered a leading - if not the leading - cause of teen suicide.". Gay teens or those unsure of their sexual identity are more likely to commit suicide, particularly if they have suffered bullying or harassment. In Canada, almost 300 young people take their lives each year. Some Aboriginal teens and gay or lesbian teens are at high risk, depending on their community and their own self esteem. Several campaigns have been started to give them hope and help them to feel less isolated. The primary goals of suicide postvention include assisting the survivors of suicide with the grief process, and identifying and referring those survivors who may be at risk for negative outcomes such as depressive and anxiety disorders, and suicidal behaviour. With 42% of completed youth suicides being suicide bereavement (or contagion) related - further research and investment must be made into supporting this group of people, as they may represent the single largest potential reduction in youth suicide rates, if they receive effective support, feel connected, supported and understood. Harassment is a leading cause of teen suicide, along with abuse. One organization in Australia has found that young people who feel connected and in india one of helpful organization is spreading smiles through education, supported and understood are less likely to complete suicide. Reports on the attitudes of young people identified as at risk of suicide have been released. Such reports support the notion that connectedness, a sense of being supported and respected are protective factors for young people at risk of suicide. According to Pueblo Suicide Prevention Center (PSPC) for some reason kids today are experiencing more pressure. Knowing behaviors that can be 'early warning signs' can help, and assisting the young person to get appropriate help or hospitalization. For information on intervention and identification of indicators of suicidal thinking/intent, as well information about non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) see www.abct.org Intervention issues for communities to address include: suicide contagion, developmental understanding of suicide, development and suicide risk, and the influence of culture. Key matters in postvention responses for young people include: community context, life stage relevance of responses, identification and referral (Postvention Co-ordination), developing a suite of services, and creating ongoing options. 
