 Yuri Sergeevich Savenko () is a Russian psychiatrist, the president since 1989 of the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia. He is also a member of the Council of Experts under the Ombudsman for Human Rights in the Russian Federation. He holds M.D. and Ph.D. qualifications, and is editor-in-chief of and a regular contributor to the Nezavisimiy Psikhiatricheskiy Zhurnal, which has been published since 1991. He had been working as editorial consultant of the Moskovskiy Psikhoterapevticheskiy Zhurnal (“Moscow Journal for Psychotherapy”) for many years before he left this position in 2008. Before defending his doctoral thesis, Savenko was expelled from the Institute of Psychiatry in 1974. His main works concern anxious psychotic syndromes, problems of 'psychotic level', subjects in psychiatry, and the classification of mental disorders. Yuri Savenko took part in a 'wrongful confinement' lawsuit filed in the European Court of Human Rights in 2003. When writing about this case, Savenko charged the Serbsky Institute with having a "pernicious effect on Russian medicine" and warned that the leadership of the psychiatric community "is now completely under the shadow of the state." On 28 May 2009, Yuri Savenko wrote to the President of the Russian Federation Dmitry Medvedev an open letter, in which Savenko asked Medvedev to submit to the State Duma a draft law prepared by the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia to address a sharp drop in the level of forensic psychiatric examinations, which Savenko attributed to a lack of competition within the sector and its increasing nationalization. Savenko is a supporter of preventive eugenics, he justifies enforced sterilization of women, which is practiced in Moscow psychoneurological nursing homes, and states that However, Article 7 of Part 1 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court defines enforced sterilization among crimes against humanity. In 2005, Savenko as the president of the IPA expressed their joint surprise at the proposal by the Executive Committee of the American Psychiatric Association to exclude homosexuality as a mental disorder from manuals on psychiatry, referred the proposal to antipsychiatric actions, and stated that ideological, social and liberal reasoning for the proposal was substituted for scientific one. His statement was put in the following words: “It is surprising for us that the substitution of ideological, social and liberal reasoning for scientific one came not from Russia and that the Executive Committee of the APA unanimously proposed to exclude homosexuality as a mental disorder from manuals on psychiatry. It shows that even the well-developed legal framework for psychiatry and the denationalization of mental health service (by 80% in the USA), ie, the absence of two of the three factors that played a crucial role in Soviet abuses of psychiatry, does not protect against inherently antipsychiatric actions.” 
